Argument 1
The following appeared in a memorandum written by the vice president of Nature's Way, a chain of stores selling health food and other health-related products.
"Previous experience has shown that our stores are most profitable in areas where residents
are highly concerned with leading healthy lives. We should therefore build our next new store
in Plainsville, which has many such residents. Plainsville merchants report that sales of
running shoes and exercise clothing are at all-time highs. The local health club, which nearly
closed five years ago due to lack of business, has more members than ever, and the weight
training and aerobics classes are always full. We can even anticipate a new generation of
customers: Plainsville's schoolchildren are required to participate in a 'fitness for life' program,
which emphasizes the benefits of regular exercise at an early age."
In this memo the vice president of Nature's Way CNW), a chain of stores selling health food
and health-related products, recommends opening a store in Plamesville. To support this
recommendation the vice president cites the following facts about Plainesville: (1) sales of
exercise shoes and clothing are at all-time highs; (2) the local health club is more popular than
ever; and (3) the city's schoolchildren are required to participate in a fitness program. Close
scrutiny of each of these facts, however, reveals that none of them lend credible support to the
recommendation.
First, strong sales of exercise apparel do not necessarily indicate that Plainesville residents
would be interested in NW's products, or that these residents are interested in exercising.
Perhaps exercise apparel happens to be fashionable at the moment, or inexpensive compared
to other types of clothing. For that matter, perhaps the stronger-than-usual sales are due to
increasing sales to tourists. In short, without mlmg out other possible reasons for the strong
sales the vice president cannot convince me on the basis of them that Plainesville residents
are exercising regularly, let alone that they would be interested in buying the sorts of food and
other products that NW sells.
Secondly, even if exercise is more popular among Plainesville residents than ever before,
the vice president assumes further that people who exercise regularly are also interested in
buying health food and health-related products. Yet the memo contains no evidence to support
this assumption. Lacking such evidence it is equally possible that aside from exercising
Plainesville residents have little interest in leading a healthy lifestyle. In fact, perhaps as a
result of regular exercise they believe they are sufficiently fit and healthy and do not need a
healthy diet.
Thirdly, the popularity of the local health club is little indication that NW will earn a profit from
a store in Plainesville. Perhaps club members live in an area of PlamesviUe nowhere near
feasible sites for a NW store. Or perhaps the dub's primary appeal is as a singles meeting
place, and that members actually have little interest in a healthy lifestyle. Besides, even if the
club's members would patronize a NW store these members might be insufficient in number to
ensure a profit for the store, especially considering that this health club is the only one in
Plainesville.
Fourth, the fact that a certain fitness program is mandatory for Plainesville's schoolchildren
accomplishes nothing toward bolstering the recommendation. Many years must pass before
these children will be old enough to make buying decisions when it comes to food and
health-related products. Their habits and interests might change radically over time. Besides,
mandatory participation is no indication of genuine interest in health or fitness. Moreover, when
these children grow older it is entirely possible that they will favor an unhealthy lifestyle--as a
reaction to the healthful habits imposed upon them nOW.
Finally, even assuming that PlamesviUe residents are strongly interested in eating health
foods and health-related products, the recommendation rests on two additional assumptions:
(1) that this interest will continue in the foreseeable future, and (2) that PlainesviUe residents
will prefer NW over other merchants that sell similar products. Until the vice president
substantiates both assumptions I remain unconvinced that a NW store in PlainesviUe would
be profitable.
In sum, the recommendation relies on certain doubtful assumptions that render it
unconvincing as it stands. To bolster the recommendation the vice president must provide dear
evidence--perhaps by way of a local survey or study--that PlainesviUe residents who buy and
wear exercise apparel, and especially the health club's members, do in fact exercise regularly,
and that these exercisers are likely to buy health foods and health related products at a NW
store. To better assess the recommendation, I would need to know why Plainesville's health
club is nonular, and whv Plainesville does not contain more health clubs. I would also need to
know what competition NW might face in PlainesviUe.























Argument 2
The following appeared in a letter sent by a committee of homeowners from the Deerhaven Acres to all homeowners in Deerhaven Acres.
"Seven years ago, homeowners in nearby Brookville community adopted a set of restrictions
on how the community's yards should be landscaped and what colors the exteriors of homes
should be painted. Since then, average property values have tripled in Brookville. In order to
raise property values in Deerhaven Acres, we should adopt our own set of restrictions on
landscaping and housepainting."
In this letter a committee of Deerhaven Acres homeowners recommends that in order to
enhance Deerhaven property values homeowners should follow certain restrictions conceming
their homes' exterior appearance. To support this recommendation the committee points out
that in the seven years since Brookwille adopted similar restrictions property values there have
risen. This argument rests on a series of unsubstantiated assumptions, and is therefore
unpersuasive as it stands.
A threshold assumption upon which the recommendation relies is that BrookviUe home
owners implemented Brookville's restrictions in the first place. The letter fails to substantiate
this crucial assumption. If these restrictions were not implemented, then any change in
Brookville's property values cannot be attributed to them. Accordingly, the committee cannot
draw any firm conclusion about what effect similar restrictions would have on Deerhaven
property values.
Even assuming that BrookviUe homeowners implemented these restrictions, the committee
relies on the additional assumption that this course of action was responsible for the increase
in BrookwiUe property values. However, it is entirely possible that one or more other factors
were instead responsible for the increase, especially since a considerable period of time has
passed since Brookville adopted its restrictions. Property values are a function of supply and
demand. Perhaps the demand for housing in the area has increased due to an influx of major
employers. Or, perhaps the supply of housing has decreased. Either scenario would provide
an alternative explanation for the increase in property values.
Even assuming that BrookviUe's rising property values are attributable to the
implementation of these restrictions, the committee fails to consider possible differences
between BrookviUe and Deerhaven that might help to bring about a different result for Deer
haven. For instance, potential Deerhaven home-buyers might be less interested in a home's
exterior appearance than BrookviUe home-bwers. For that matter, perhaps Deerhaven
home-buyers would find consistent exterior appearance a distasteful feature in which case
adopting these restrictions might actually tend to decrease Deer-haven property values.
Without accounting for these and other possible dissimilarities, the committee cannot assume
that what resulted in rising property values in Brookville would bring about the same result in
Deerhaven.
In conclusion, to persuade me that Deerhaven should adopt the proposed restrictions the
committee must supply clear evidence that the implementation of Brookville's restrictions, and
not some other factor, was responsible for the rise in Brookville's property values. The
committee must also provide evidence that other factors affecting home prices in the two areas
are otherwise essentially the same.























Argument 3
The following appeared in a newspaper article about law firms in the city of Megalopolis.
"In Megalopolis, the number of law school graduates who went to work for large, corporate
firms declined by 15% over the last three years, whereas an increasing number of graduates
took jobs at small, general practice firms. Even though large firms usually offer much higher
salaries, law school graduates are choosing to work for the smaller firms most likely because
they experience greater job satisfaction at smaller firms. In a survey of first-year students at a
leading law school, most agreed with the statement that earning a high salary was less
important to them than job satisfaction. This finding suggests that the large, corporate firms of
Megalopolis will need to offer graduates more benefits and incentives and reduce the number
of hours they must work."
This article concludes that despite the relatively high salaries at Megalopolis' large law firms,
these fro-ns must begin offering more benefits and incentives to new law-school graduates,
while requiring them to work fewer hours, in order to reverse a 3-year 15% decline in the
number of graduates going to work for these firms. To justify this conclusion the article's author
notes that during the last 3 years the number of new law-school graduates going to work for
small firms has risen. The author also cites a survey at one leading law school in which most
first-year students indicated that job satisfaction was more important than salary. I find this
argument logically unconvincing in several respects.
First of all, the 15% decline that the author cites is not necessarily due to the vocational
preferences of new law-school graduates. It is entirely possible that the number of new
graduates preferring to work for large firms has not declined, but that during the last three
years MegalopoLis' large firms have had fewer and fewer job openings for these graduates.
Since the article fails to account for this alternative explanation for the 15% decline, the
article's author cannot make any sound recommendations to law faa-ns based on that decline.
As for the survey that the article cites, the vocational goals of first-year law students do not
necessarily reflect those of graduating students; after all, a law student's vocational goals can
change over a three-year period. Moreover, the goals of students at one law school do not
necessarily reflect those of the overall pool of graduates that might seek employment with
Megalopolis law firms. In fact, given that the school whose students participated in the survey
was a "leading" school, it is entirely possible that the vast majority of the school's graduates
may choose among offers from many large firms in many cities. If so, this fact would further
undermine the survey's relevance in prescribing any course of action for Megalopolis' law
firms.
Finally, the author falsely equates the proposed tangible incentives with job satisfaction,
which is an intangible reward based on the nature of one's work. Moreover, enhanced job
benefits can be tantamount to an enhanced salary, and shorter working hours amount to a
higher hourly wage. Thus if new law-school graduates seeking jobs in MegalopoLis are less
interested in monetary rewards than in job satisfaction, then the proposed incentives are not
likely to entice these graduates.
In sum, the argument is logically flawed and therefore unconvincing as it stands. To
strengthen it the author must either modify the proposal to provide incentives for those seeking
job satisfaction over monetary rewards, or provide better evidence that new law school
graduates seeking jobs in Megalopolis would fred the proposed incentives entic ing.























Argument 4
"Of the two leading real estate firms in our town---Adams Realty and Fitch Realty---Adams is
clearly superior. Adams has 40 real estate agents. In contrast, Fitch has 25, many of whom
work only part-time. Moreover, Adams' revenue last year was twice as high as that of Fitch,
and included home sales that averaged $168,000, compared to Fitch's $144,000. Homes
listed with Adams sell faster as well: ten years ago, I listed my home with Fitch and it took
more than four months to sell; last year, when I sold another home, I listed it with Adams, and it
took only one month. Thus, if you want to sell your home quickly and at a good price, you
should use Adams."
The author of this argument claims that Adams Realty is superior to Fitch Realty. To support
this claim the author cites certain statistics about the number and working hours of the fa'ms'
agents, and the number and sales prices of homes sold by the two fLrms. The author also
cites anecdotal evidence involving her own experience with Fitch and Adams. Close scrutiny of
this evidence reveals that it lends little credible support for the author's assertion.
The author bases her claim partly on the fact that Adams has more agents than Fitch, and
that many of Fitch's agents work only part-time. However, the author provides no evidence that
the quality of a real-estate firm is directly proportional to the number of its agents or the
number of hours per week that its agents work. Lacking such evidence, it is equally possible
that a smaller firm is more effective than a larger one, and that a part-time agent is more
effective than a full-time agent. Besides, the author does not provide any information about
how many Adams agents work part-time.
To further support her claim the author cites the fact that Adams sold more properties last
year than Fitch. However, the author overlooks the possibility that last year's sales volume
amounted to an aberration, and that in most other years Adams has actually sold fewer
properties than Fitch. Moreover, the disparity in sales volume can readily be explained by
factors other than the comparative quality of the two fkrrns. Perhaps Adams serves a denser
geographic area, or an area where turnover in home-ownership is higher for reasons unrelated
to Adams' effectiveness. Or perhaps sales volume is higher at Adams simply because it
employs more agents, and each Adams agent actually sells fewer homes on average than
each Fitch agent does. Without ruling out such alternative explanations for the disparity in
sales volume, the author cannot defend the conclusion that based on this evidence that
Adams is superior to Fitch.
In further support of her claim the author points out that the average sales price of a home
sold by Adams is greater than the average price of a home sold by Fitch. However, this
evidence shows only that the homes that Adams sells are more valuable on average than the
ones that Fitch sells, not that Adams is more effective in selling homes than Fitch. Moreover, it
is possible that a few relatively high-priced or low-priced properties skewed these averages,
rendering any conclusions about the comparative quality of the two firms based on these
averages unfair.
For additional support the author points out that it took Fitch Realty considerable longer to
sell one of the author's homes than it took Adams Realty to sell another one of her homes ten
years earlier. However, this disparity is explainable by other plausible factors, such as
changing economic conditions during that ten-year period, or a difference in the desirability of
the two properties. Without establishing that all other factors affecting the speed of a sale were
essentially the same for the two homes, the author cannot rely on this limited anecdotal
evidence to support her daim.
In conclusion, the author's evidence lends litde credible support to her claim. To persuade
me that Adams is better than Fitch, the author would need to provide clear evidence that
individual Adams agents are more effective in selling homes than individual Fitch agents, and
that the disparity in home sales and sales price is attributable to that difference. Finally, to
better evaluate the author's claim we would need more information comparing the percentage
of agents working part-time at Fitch versus Adams. We would also need more information
about the comparative attractiveness of the author's two homes, and the extent to which the
residential real-estate market changed during the decade between the sale of these two
homes.























Argument 5
The following was written as a part of an application for a small business loan by a group of developers in the city of Monroe.
"A jazz music club in Monroe would be a tremendously profitable enterprise. Currently, the
nearest jazz club is 65 miles away; thus, our proposed club, the C Note, would have the local
market all to itself. Plus, jazz is extremely popular in Monroe: over 100,000 people attended
Monroe's jazz festival last summer, several well-known jazz musicians live in Monroe, and the
highest-rated radio program in Monroe is 'Jazz Nightly,' which airs every weeknight. Finally, a
nationwide study indicates that the typical jazz fan spends close to $1,000 per year on jazz
entertainment. It is clear that the C Note cannot help but make money."
This loan applicant claims that a jazz club in Monroe would be a profitable venture. To
support this claim the applicant points out that Monroe has no other jazz clubs. He also cites
various other evidence that jazz is popular among Monroe residents. Careful examination of
this supporting evidence, however, reveals that it lends little credible support to the applicant's
claim.
First of all, if the demand for a live jazz club in Monroe were as great as the applicant claims,
it seems that Monroe would already have one or more such clubs. The fact that the closest
jazz club is 65 miles away suggests a lack of interest among Monroe residents in a local jazz
club. Since the applicant has not adequately responded to this concem, his claim that the
proposed club would be profitable is untenable.
The popularity of Monroe's annual jazz festival and of its nightly jazz radio show might
appear to lend support to the applicant's claim. However, it is entirely possible that the vast
majority of festival attendees are out-of-town visitors. Moreover, the author provides no
evidence that radio listeners would be interested in going out to hear live jazz. For that matter,
the radio program might actually pose competition for the C-Note club, especially considering
that the program airs during the evening.
Nor does the mere fact that several weU-known jazz musicians live in Monroe lend
significant support to the applicant's claim. It is entirely possible that these musicians perform
elsewhere, perhaps at the club located 65 miles away. This would go a long way toward
explaining why Monroe does not currently have a jazz club, and it would weaken the
applicant's assertion that the C-Note would be profitable.
Finally, the nationwide study showing that the average jazz fan spends $1,000 each year on
jazz entertainment would lend support to the applicant's claim only if Monroe residents typify
jazz fans nationwide. However, the applicant provides no credible evidence that this is the
case.
In conclusion, the loan applicant's argument is not persuasive. To bolster it he must provide
clearer evidence that Monroe residents would patronize the C-Note on a regular basis. Such
evidence might include the following: statistics showing that a significant number of Monroe
residents attend the jazz festival each year; a survey showing that fans of Monroe's jazz radio
program would go out to hear live jazz if they had the chance; and assurances from
well-known local jazz musicians that they would play at the C-Note if given the opportunity.























Argument 6
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of the Clearview newspaper.
"In the next mayoral election, residents of Clearview should vote for Ann Green, who is a
member of the Good Earth Coalition, rather than for Frank Braun, a member of the Clearview
town council, because the current members are not protecting our environment. For example,
during the past year the number of factories in Clearview has doubled, air pollution levels have
increased, and the local hospital has treated 25 percent more patients with respiratory
illnesses. If we elect Ann Green, the environmental problems in Clearview will certainly be
solved."
This editorial recommends that Clearview residents vote to replace city-council member
Frank Braun with Ann Green, a member of the Good Earth Coalition. To support this
recommendation the editorial cites a significant increase during the last year in the number of
Clearview factories and in the number of Clearview hospital patients treated for respiratory
illnesses. On the basis of this evidence the author infers that the current council members are
not protecting the city's environment and that electing Green will solve the city's environmental
problems. This argument is logically flawed in several critical respects.
To begin with, the argument unfairly assumes that last year's increase in the number of
factories was due to the city council's decisions--rather than to some other phenomenon-and
that this increase poses environmental problems for Clearview. The editorial provides no
evidence to substantiate these assumptions. Lacking such evidence it is entirely possible that
the council actually opposed the increase but lacked adequate authority to prevent it, or that
the new factories do not in fact harm Clearview's environment.
The argument also assumes unfairly that last year's increase in the number of patients
reporting respiratory problems indicates worsening environmental problems in Clear view.
Perhaps the actual incidence of such health problems has not increased, and the reported
increase is due to increasing awareness among Clearview residents of respiratory problems.
Even if the incidence of respiratory problems has in fact increased, the increase might due to
an influx of people with pre-existing such problems, or to more effective cigarette marketing.
Since the editorial fails to rule out these and other possible explanations for the increase, I
cannot accept any conclusions about Clearview's environment
should elect to city council let alone about who voters based on last year's hospital records.
Even if the two cited increases do indicate a worsening of Clearview's environment due to
the city council's decisions, the argument rests on the further assumption that Braun was a
factor in those decisions. But, since the editorial provides no evidence to substantiate this
assumption it is equally possible that Braun actually opposed the decisions that were
responsible for these increases. Thus without better evidence that Braun contributed to key
decisions adversely effecting Clearview's environment the editorial remains unconvincing.
Even assuming that Braun was at least partially responsible for the two increases, and that
those increases indicate a worsening environment, the editorial provides no clear evidence
that Green would be effective in reversing that trend let alone more effective than Braun. The
mere fact that Green is a member of the Good Earth Coalition hardly suffices to prove her
willingness and ability to help solve Clearview's environmental problems, at least not without
more information about that coalition and Green's involvement in it.
Finally, even if Green would in fact be more effective than Braun in solving Clearview's
environmental problems, the author provides no firm evidence that electing Green is
necessary to solve those problems, or that electing Green would suffice. Perhaps another
candidate, or another course of action, would be more effective. Even if Green does everything
in her power as city-council member to solve these problems, perhaps additional
measures--such as replacing other council members, state legislators, or even the state's
governor--would also be required in order to achieve Clearview's environmental objectives.
In sum, the editorial's author cannot justify his or her voting recommendation on the basis of
the scant evidence provided in the editorial. To bolster the recommendation the author must
provide better evidence that (1) Clearview has environmental problems to begin with, (2)
Green would be more effective than either Braun or any other candidate in solving those
problems, and (3) electing Green would suffice to solve those problems. To better assess the
argument I would need to know the scope of the city council's authority respecting
environmental decisions. I would also need to know Braun's voting record on environmental
issues, Green's experience and position on those issues, and the voters' other
choices--besides Green and Braun.























Argument 7
The following appeared in a memorandum issued by the strategic planning department at Omni Inc.
"Mesa Foods, a manufacturer of snack foods that currently markets its products within a
relatively small region of the country, has strong growth potential. Mesa enjoyed a 20 percent
increase in profits last year, and its best-selling product, Diabolique Salsa, has had increased
sales over each of the past three years. Since Omni Inc. is interested in reaching 14-to-25 year
olds, the age group that consumes the most snack food, we should buy Mesa Foods, and
concentrate in particular on marketing Diabolique Salsa throughout the country."
This Omni, Inc. memorandum recommends that Omni buy snack-food manufacturer Mesa
Foods and aggressively promote its brand of salsa nationwide. To support this
recommendation the memo relies on the exceptional profitability of Mesa's salsa during the
last three years, along with the fact that Mesa's overall profits were up last year. However, the
recommendation relies on a series of unsubstantiated assumptions, which render it
unconvincing as it stands.
First of all, the memo indicates that Omni is interested in selling to 14-to-25 year-olds.
Accordingly, the argument rests on the assumption that Mesa's snack foods appeal to this age
group. Yet, we are not informed what types of snack foods Mesa manufactures, aside from its
salsa. It is entirely possible that Mesa's foods, including its salsa, appeal primarily to other age
groups. If this is the case, the recommended acquisition would not serve Omni's goal.
Secondly, the argument rests on the assumption that in the region where Mesa's products
are sold the preferences of consumers between the ages of 14 and 25 typify nationwide
preferences among this age group. If this is not the case, then it is entirely possible that Omni
would not sell enough Mesa snack foods, including its salsa, to earn a profit from its Mesa
operation. Thus, without more marketing information about the snack-food tastes of 14-to-25
year-olds nationwide it is difficult to assess the merit of the memo's recommendation.
Even if the memo's author can substantiate the foregoing assumptions, the author overlooks
the possibility that last year's 20% increase in Mesa's profits was an aberration, and that in
most other years Mesa has not been profitable. Also, the 20% increase might have been due
entirely to sales of Mesa's salsa, and aside from the profit from salsa sales Mesa's profitability
is actually declining. If either is the case, and if Mesa's salsa does not turn out to be popular
among 14-to-25 year-olds across the nation, then Omni is unlikely to profit from the
recommended course of action.
In condusion, the recommendation is not well supported. To convince me that the Mesa
Foods acquisition would be profitable Omni would need to provide clear statistical evidence
that Mesa's snack foods, and its salsa in particular, would appeal to 14-to-25 year-olds
nationwide. To better evaluate the recommendation, I would need more information about
Mesa's profitability over a longer time period, and about the extent to which Mesa's salsa
accounts for any such profitability.























Argument 8
The following appeared in a memorandum from a dean at Omega University.
"Fifteen years ago, Omega University implemented a new procedure that encouraged
students to evaluate the teaching effectiveness of all their professors. Since that time, Omega
professors have begun to assign higher grades in their classes, and overall student grade
averages at Omega have risen by thirty percent. Potential employers apparently believe the
grades at Omega are inflated; this would explain why Omega graduates have not been as
successful at getting jobs as have graduates from nearby Alpha University. To enable its
graduates to secure better jobs, Omega University should now terminate student evaluation of
professors."
In this memo Omega University's dean points out that Omega graduates are less successful
in getting jobs than Alpha University graduates, despite the fact that during the past 15 years
the overall grade average of Omega students has risen by 30%. The dean also points out that
during the past 15 years Omega has encouraged its students, by way of a particular procedure,
to evaluate the effectiveness of their professors. The dean reasons that this procedure
explains the grade-average increase, which in turn has created a perception among employers
that Omega graduates are less qualified for jobs. On the basis of this line of reasoning the
dean concludes that to enable Omega graduates to find better jobs Omega must terminate its
professor-evaluation procedure. This argument contains several logical flaws, which render it
unconvincing.
A threshold problem with the argument involves the voluntary nature of the evaluation
procedure. The dean provides no evidence about the number or percentage of Omega
students who participate in the procedure. Lacking such evidence it is entirely possible that
those numbers are insignificant, in which case terminating the procedure is unlikely to have
any effect on the grade average of Omega students or their success in getting jobs after
graduation.
The argument also assumes unfairly that the grade-average increase is the result of the
evaluation procedure--rather than some other phenomenon. The dean ignores a host of other
possible explanations for the increase--such as a trend at Omega toward higher admission
standards, or higher quality instruction or facilities. Without ruling out all other possible
explanations for the grade-average increase, the dean cannot convince me that by terminating
the evaluation procedure Omega would curb its perceived grade inflation let alone help its
graduates get jobs.
Even if the evaluation procedure has resulted in grade inflation at Omega, the dean's claim
that grade inflation explains why Omega graduates are less successful than Alpha graduates
in getting jobs is unjustified. The dean overlooks a myriad of other possible reasons for
Omega's comparatively poor job-placement record. Perhaps Omega's career services are
inadequate; or perhaps Omega's curriculum does not prepare students for the job market as
effectively as Alpha's. In short, without accounting for other factors that might contribute to
Omega graduates' comparative lack of success in getting jobs, the dean cannot justify the
claim that if Omega curbs its grade inflation employers will be more likely to hire Omega
graduates.
Finally, even if the dean can substantiate all of the foregoing assumptions, the dean's
assertion that Omega must terminate its evaluation procedure to enable its graduates to find
better jobs is still unwarranted, in two respects. First, the dean ignores other possible ways by
which Omega can increase its job-placement record--for example, by improving its public
relations or career-counseling services. Second, the dean unfairly equates "more" jobs with
"better" jobs. In other words, even if more Omega graduates are able to find jobs as a result of
the dean's recommended course of action, the kinds of jobs Omega graduates find would not
necessarily be better ones.
In sum, the dean's argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen it the dean must
provide better evidence that the increase in grade average is attributable to Omega's
professor-evaluation procedure, and that the end result is a perception on the part of
employers that Omega graduates are less qualified for jobs than Alpha graduates. To better
assess the argument I would need to analyze 15-year trends in (l) the percentage of Omega
students participating in the evaluation procedure, (2) Omega's admission standards and
quality of education, and (3) Omega's emphasis on job training and career preparation. I would
also need to know what other means are available to Omega for enabling its graduates to find
better jobs.























Argument 9
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of a Batavia newspaper.
"The department of agriculture in Batavia reports that the number of dairy farms throughout the
country is now 25 percent greater than it was 10 years ago. During this same time period,
however, the price of milk at the local Excello Food Market has increased from $1.50 to over
$3.00 per gallon. To prevent farmers from continuing to receive excessive profits on an
apparently increased supply of milk, the Batavia government should begin to regulate retail
milk prices. Such regulation is necessary to ensure both lower prices and an adequate supply
of milk for consumers."
This editorial recommends that Batavia's government regulate milk prices because profits from
milk sales are excessive given the apparently adequate supply. The editorial also claims that
price regulation would help ensure an adequate supply of milk. To support these assertions the
author cites the fact that over the past ten years the number of dairy farms in Batavia has
increased by 25% while at ExceUo Food Market milk prices have increased by 100%.
However, the argument relies on a series of unsubstantiated assumptions, which render it
unconvincing as it stands.
First of all, the author assumes that ExceUo's milk prices reflect those throughout Batavia.
However, the author provides no evidence that this is the case. To the extent that Excello's
milk prices currently exceed nationwide averages the author's argument for government
regulation of milk prices would be undermined.
In the second place, even if ExceUo's milk prices reflect those in Batavia generally, in
claiming that milk prices are particularly "excessive" the author assumes that milk-sale profits
exceed profits from the sale of other goods in Batavia to a significant degree. But the author
provides no evidence to substantiate this assumption. Perhaps other prices have risen
commensurably, or perhaps even more on a percentage basis, during the same t/me period.
Moreover, perhaps profit margins from the sale of other goods are even greater than profits
from milk sales. In either event the author could not justifiably rely on the mere fact that milk
prices have increased by 100% to support the claim that milk sale profits are excessive.
In the third place, the author assumes that an increase in milk prices results in increased
profits. However, this is not necessarily the case. It is entirely possible that the costs
associated with producing and delivering milk have increased as well over the last ten years.
Thus the strength of the author's claim of excessive milk-sale profits depends on a cost-benefit
analysis that the author does not provide.
In the fourth place, based on the fact that the number of dairy farms has increased the
author infers that the supply of milk has also increased. However, this is not necessarily the
case. It is possible that dairy farm production has shifted away from milk to other dairy
products, and that the supply of milk has actually declined over this time period. To the extent
that this is the case, then the author's supply-and-demand argument that milk prices are
excessive is unconvincing.
Finally, in asserting that price regulation would help ensure an adequate supply of milk the
author overlooks the possibility that milk producers would respond to the regulation by
producing less milk, depending on the extent to which demand increases as a result of lower
milk prices. If regulation has the effect of lowering profits, then common sense tells me that
milk producers might be less inclined to produce milk. Without ruling out this possible scenario,
the author cannot convince me that the recommendation would help ensure an adequate
supply of milk.
In conclusion, the recommendation for regulation of milk prices is not well supported. To
convince me that the proposed regulation is needed to ensure a reasonably priced milk supply,
the author must provide clear statistical evidence that Excello's milk prices reflect nationwide
milk prices and that profits from milk sales are in fact excessive. To better evaluate the
recommendation, I would need more information about how the proposed regulation would
effect both the supply of milk and the demand for milk in Batavia.























Argument 10
The following appeared in a memo from the mayor of the town of West Egg.
"Two years ago, our consultants predicted that West Egg's landfill, which is used for garbage
disposal, would be completely filled within five years. During the past two years, however, town
residents have been recycling twice as much aluminum and paper as they did in previous
years. Next month the amount of material recycled should further increase, since charges for
garbage pickup will double. Furthermore, over ninety percent of the respondents to a recent
survey said that they would do more recycling in the future. Because of our residents' strong
commitment to recycling, the available space in our landfill should last for considerably longer
than predicted."
In this memo West Egg's mayor reasons that West Egg's residents are now strongly
committed to recycling, and projects that the city's landfill will not be filled to capacity until
considerably later than anticipated two years ago. To support this projection the mayor cites (1)
a twofold increase in aluminum and paper recycling by West Egg residents over the last two
years, (2) an impending twofold increase in charges for trash pickup, and (3) a recent survey in
which 90% of respondents indicated that they intend to do more recycling in the future. For
several reasons, I am not convinced that the mayor's projection is accurate.
To begin with, in all likelihood aluminum and paper account for only some of the materials
West Egg's residents can recycle. Perhaps recycling of other recyclable materials--such as
plastic and glass--has declined to the point that the total amount of recycled materials has also
declined. If so, then the mayor could hardly justify the claim that West Egg's residents are
becoming more committed to recycling.
Another problem with the argument is that an increase in the amount of recycled materials
does not necessarily indicate a decrease in the total amount of trash deposited in the city's
landfill. Admittedly, if West Egg residents previously disposed of certain recyclable materials
that they now recycle instead, then this shift from disposal to recycling would serve to reduce
the amount of trash going to the landfill. However, the mayor provides no evidence of such a
shift.
Moreover, the argument overlooks the strong possibility that the recycling habits of West
Egg residents are not the only factor affecting how quickly the landfill will reach capacity. Other
such factors might indude population and demographic shifts, the habits of people from
outside West Egg whose trash also feeds the landfill, and the availability of altemative disposal
methods such as burning. Thus regardless of the recycling efforts of West Egg residents the
landfill might nevertheless reach full capacity by the date originally forecast.
Yet another problem with the argument involves the mayor's implicit claim that increased
charges for trash pickup will serve to slow the rate at which the landffil is reaching capacity.
This claim relies on the unlikely assumption that West Egg residents have the option of
recycling--or disposing in some other way--much of what they would otherwise send to the
landfill. However, it is likely these residents have no practical choice but to send some refuse
to the landfill. The greater the amount, the less likely higher trash charges would have any
effect on how quickly the landffil reaches capacity.
Finally, the mayor provides no evidence that the survey's respondents are representative of
the overall group of people whose trash goes to the city's landfill. Lacking such evidence, it is
entirely possible that people inclined to recycle were more willing to respond to the survey than
other people were. In short, without better evidence that the survey is statistically reliable the
mayor cannot rely on it to draw any firm conclusions about the overall recycling commitment of
West Egg residents--let alone about how quickly the landfill will reach capacity.
In sum, the mayor's projection is simply not credible, at least based on the memo. Rather
than relying solely on questionable recycling statistics, the mayor should provide direct
evidence that the amount of trash going to the landfill is declining and that this trend will not
reverse itself anytime soon. To better assess the accuracy of the mayor's projection it would be
useful to know who besides West Egg residents contributes trash to the land fLU, and whether
the amount of trash those people contribute is declining or is likely to decline in the near future.























Argument 11
The following appeared in a memo from a vice president of Alta Manufacturing.
"During the past year, Alta Manufacturing had thirty percent more on-the-job accidents than
nearby Panoply Industries, where the work shifts are one hour shorter than ours. Experts
believe that a significant contributing factor in many on-the-job accidents is fatigue and sleep
deprivation among workers. Therefore, to reduce the number of on-the-job accidents at Alta
and thereby increase productivity, we should shorten each of our three work shifts by one hour
so that our employees will get adequate amounts of sleep."
This editorial recommends that Alta Manufacturing reduce its work shifts by one hour each in
order to reduce its on-the-job accident rate and thereby increase Alta's productivity. To support
this recommendation the author points out that last year the number of accidents at Alta was
30% greater than at Panoply Industries, where work shifts were one hour shorter. The author
also cites certain experts who believe that many on-the-job accidents are caused by fatigue
and sleep deprivation. I find this the argument unconvincing for several reasons.
First and foremost, the author provides absolutely no evidence that overall worker
productivity is attributable in part to the number of on-the-job accidents. Although common
sense informs me that such a relationship exists, the author must provide some evidence of
this cause-and-effect relationship before I can accept the author's final conclusion that the
proposed course of action would in fact increase Alta's productivity.
Secondly, the author assumes that some accidents at Alta are caused by fatigue or sleep
deprivation. However, the author overlooks other possible causes, such as inadequate
equipment maintenance or worker training, or the inherent hazards of Alta's manufacturing
processes. By the same token, Panoply's comparatively low accident rate might be attributable
not to the length of its work shifts but rather to other factors, such as superior equipment
maintenance or worker training. In other words, without ruling out alternative causes of
on-the-job accidents at both companies, the author cannot justifmbly conclude that merely by
emulating Panoply's work-shift policy Alta would reduce the number of such accidents.
Thirdly, even assuming that Alta's workers are fatigued or sleep-deprived, and that this is the
cause of some of Alta's on-the-job accidents, in order to accept the author's solution to this
problem we must assume that Alta's workers would use the additional hour of free time to
sleep or rest. However, the author provides no evidence that they would use the time in this
manner. It is entirely possible that Alta's workers would use that extra hour to engage in some
other fatiguing activity. Without ruling out this possibility the author cannot convincingly
conclude that reducing Alta's work shifts by one hour would reduce Alta's accident rate.
Finally, a series of problems with the argument arise from the scant statistical information on
which it relies. In comparing the number of accidents at Alta and Panoply, the author fails to
consider that the per-worker accident rate might reveal that Alta is actually safer than Panoply,
depending on the total number of workers at each company. Second, perhaps accident rates
at the two companies last year were aberrations, and during other years Alta's accident rate
was no greater, or even lower, than Panoply's rate. Or perhaps Panoply is not representative
of industrial companies generally, and that other companies with shorter work shifts have even
higher accident rates. In short, since the argument relies on very limited statistical information I
cannot take the author's recommendation seriously.
In conclusion, the recommendation for emulating Panoply's work-shift policy is not well
supported. To convince me that shorter work shifts would reduce Alta's on-the-job accident
rate, the author must provide clear evidence that work-shift length is responsible for some of
Alta's accidents. The author must also supply evidence to support her final conclusion that a
lower accident rate would in fact increase overall worker productivity.























Argument 12
The following appeared in a memo from the owner of Green Thumb Gardening Center, a small business serving a suburban town.
"There is evidence that consumers are becoming more and more interested in growing their
own -vegetables. A national survey conducted last month indicated that many consumers were
dissatisfied with the quality of fresh vegetables available in supermarkets. And locally, the
gardening magazine Great Gardens has sold out at the Village News stand three months in a
row. Thus, we at Green Thumb Gardening Center can increase our profits by greatly
expanding the variety of vegetable seeds we stock for gardeners this coming spring."
In this memo the owner of Green Thumb Gardening Center (GT) concludes that GT could
increase its profits by expanding its stock of vegetable seeds. The owner cites a national
survey showing growing dissatisfaction with supermarket vegetables, and points out that a
certain gardening magazine has sold out at one local newsstand three months in a row. I find
the owner's argument weak, for three reasons.
First, by relying on the national survey to support its conclusion the argument depends on
the assumption that the level of satisfaction locally with store-bought groceries reflects national
levels. Yet the owner provides no evidence to support this assumption. It is possible that
residents of this town are quite satisfied with these vegetables. Without eliminating this
possibility, the owner cannot rely on the national survey to conclude that this town's residents
would be interested in buying vegetable seeds from GT.
Secondly, by relying on the survey the argument assumes that consumers who are
dissatisfied with store-bought groceries are likely to grow their own vegetables instead.
However, the owner fails to provide any evidence to support this assumption. Perhaps
consumers are continuing to buy vegetables from grocery stores despite their dissatisfaction.
Or perhaps this dissatisfaction is leading consumers to buy their vegetables from special
produce markets and vegetable stands instead of supermarkets. Since the owner has failed to
consider and rule out these possibilities, the owner's assertion that this town's dissatisfied
consumers would be eager to buy vegetable seeds from GT to grow their own vegetables
cannot be taken seriously.
Thirdly, the mere fact that a certain gardening magazine has recently sold out at one
newsstand in this town is scant evidence that the town's residents would be eager to buy
vegetable seeds from GT. Perhaps three months ago this newsstand decreased the number of
copies it stocks; or perhaps the magazine does not even concern itself with vegetable
gardening; or perhaps the only reason for this apparent increase in sales is that other
newsstands in town have stopped stocking the magazine. Given these possible scenarios, the
fact that one newsstand has sold every copy of the last three monthly issues proves nothing
about local trends in vegetable gardening.
In conclusion, the owner's argument is unpersuasive. To strengthen it the owner must
provide more convincing evidence that consumers in this town are actually becoming less
satisfied with supermarket vegetables, and that as a result they are buying fewer such
vegetables. To better evaluate the argument we would need more information about
alternative sources of vegetables for local consumers--for example, the number and quality of
produce stands. We would also need to know why the newsstand's copies of the gardening
magazine sold out.























Argument 13
The following appeared in a newsletter offering advice to investors.
"Over 80 percent of the respondents to a recent survey indicated a desire to reduce their
intake of foods containing fats and cholesterol, and today low-fat products abound in many
food stores. Since many of the food products currently marketed by Old Dairy Industries are
high in fat and cholesterol, the company's sales are likely to diminish greatly and their profits
will no doubt decrease. We therefore advise Old Dairy stockholders to sell their shares and
other investors not to purchase stock in this company."
This excerpt from an investment newsletter cites a recent study in which 80% of
respondents indicated a desire to reduce their consumption of high-fat and high-cholesterol
foods, then points out that food stores are well-stocked with low-fat food products. Based on
this evidence the newsletter predicts a significant decline in sales and profits for Old Dairy
(OD), a producer of dairy products high in fat and cholesterol, and advises investors not to own
OD stock. I find this advice specious, on several grounds.
First, the excerpt fails to assure me that the survey results accurately reflect the desires of
most consumers, or that the results accurately predict consumer behavior. Without evidence
that the respondents' desires are representative of those of the overall population where OD
products are sold, it is hasty to draw any conclusions about future food buying habits from the
survey. Moreover, common sense informs me that consumers do not necessarily make
food-purchase decisions in strict accordance with their expressed desires. Thus as it stands
the statistic that the newsletter cites amounts to scant evidence that OD sales and profits will
decline in the future.
Secondly, the fact that low-fat foods are in abundant supply in food stores does not
necessarily indicate an increasing demand for low-fat dairy products or a diminishing demand
for high-fat dairy products. Absent evidence to the contrary, it is quite possible that consumers
are buying other types of low-fat foods but are still demanding high fat in their dairy products.
For that matter, it is entirely possible that food stores are well-stocked with low-fat foods
because actual demand has not met the demand anticipated by the stores.
Thirdly, even assuming an indisputable consumer trend toward purchasing more low-fat
daizy products and fewer high-fat dairy products, the newsletter concludes too hastily that OD
profits will decline as a result. OD can always raise the price of its dairy products to offset
declining sales, and given a sufficient demand OD might still turn a profit, despite the general
consumer trend. Besides, profit is a function of not just revenue but also expenses. Perhaps
OD expenses will decline by a greater amount than its revenue; if so, then OD profits will
increase despite falling revenues.
In sum, without additional information prudent investors should refrain from following the
newsletter's advice. To better assess the soundness of this advice it would be helpful to know
the following: (1) the demographic profile of the survey's respondents; (2) the extent to which
consumer desires regarding food intake accord with their subsequent behavior; (3) the extent
of OD loyalty among its regular retail customers who might continue to prefer OD products
over low-fat products even at higher prices; and (4) the extent to which OD might be able to
reduce expenses to offset any revenue loss resulting from diminishing sales of OD products.























Argument 14
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of a local newspaper from a citizen of the state of Impecunia.
"Two years ago our neighboring state, Lucria, began a state lottery to supplement tax
revenues for education and public health. Today, Lucria spends more per pupil than we do,
and Lucria's public health program treats far more people than our state's program does. If we
were to establish a state lottery like the one in Lucria, the profits could be used to improve our
educational system and public health program. The new lottery would doubtless be successful,
because a survey conducted in our capital city concludes that citizens of Impecunia already
spend an average of $50 per person per year on gambling."
In this editorial the author condudes that by establishing a lottery the state of Impecunia
could use the profits from it to improve the state's education and public health programs. To
support this conclusion the author points out that the neighboring state of Lucria established a
lottery two years ago, and that today Lucria spends more per pupil and treats more people
through its health programs than Impecunia does. The editorial also cites a study showing that
the average Impecunia resident now spends $50 per year on gambling. In several respects,
however, the evidence lends little credible support for the argument.
First of all, the fact that Lucria now spends more than Impecunia per pupil, in itself, lends no
support to the argument. Perhaps Lucria has always placed a high priority on education; or
perhaps Lucria has always had more funds than Impecunia to spend on its programs,
including education. Lacking dearer evidence that Lucria's lottery successfully raised revenues
that were then used to increase the amount spent per pupil, the author cannot expect us to
take seriously the claim that by establishing a similar lottery Impecunia would improve its
education programs.
Similarly, the fact that Lucria's health programs treat more people than Impecunia's
programs lends no support to the argument. Perhaps Lucria's population is greater than
Impecunia's; or perhaps its residents are older, on average, than Impecunia's residents, and
therefore require a greater measure of health care. Without considering and ruling out these
and other possible explanations for the distinction cited, the author cannot justifiably conclude
that Lucria's lottery was responsible for improved health care in that state or that a similar
lottery in Impecunia would carry a similar result.
Moreover, the argument unfairly assumes that the lottery in Lucria has been profitable. The
author provides no evidence that this is the case. It is entirely possible that the money used for
education and health care in Lucria comes from sources other than the lottery. Without
accounting for this possibility, the author cannot justify the conclusion that a lottery in
Impecunia would be successful.
Finally, the fact that Impecunia's residents spend $50 per capita on gambling each year
lends little support to the argument. Admittedly, this statistic amounts to some evidence of
interest among Impecunla's residents in gambling, and therefore potential interest in a lottery.
However, this evidence in itself does not suffice to prove that the lottery will in fact be popular.
Perhaps Impecunia residents have no more discretionary income to participate in a lottery
after spending $50 on other forms of gambling. Or perhaps Impecunia residents typically travel
elsewhere to gamble as part of their vacations, and that they would not otherwise be interested
in gambling. In short, without more convincing evidence of both an ability and a willingness on
the part of Impecunia's residents to participate in a lottery the author cannot convince me that
the lottery will be profitable.
In conclusion, the editorial has not convinced me that a lottery would be profitable and would
serve to improve Impecunia's education and health programs. To better evaluate the argument
I would need more information comparing Lucria's level of health care and education
expenditures before and after the lottery was established. To strengthen the argument, the
author must provide dear evidence that Lucria's lottery was profitable and that these profits
contributed to improved education and health care in Lucria. The author must also provide
clearer evidence of the willingness and ability of Impecunia residents to participate broadly in a
lottery.























Argument 15
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of the Walnut Grove town newspaper.
"Walnut Grove's town council has advocated switching from EZ Disposal (which has had the
contract for trash collection services in Walnut Grove for the past ten years) to ABC Waste,
because EZ recently raised its monthly fee from $2,000 to $2,500 a month, whereas ABC's fee
is still $2,000. But the town council is mistaken; we should continue using EZ. EZ collects trash
twice a week, while ABC collects only once. Moreover, EZ---which, like ABC, currently has a
fleet of 20 trucks---has ordered additional trucks. Finally, EZ provides exceptional service: 80
percent of respondents to last year's town survey agreed that they were 'satisfied' with EZ's
performance."
This letter recommends that Walnut Grove continue to contract with EZ Disposal, which has
provided trash-collection services to Walnut Grove for ten years, rather than switching to ABC
Waste. To justify this recommendation the letter's author notes that even though ABC's weekly
fee is $500 less than EZ's, EZ collects twice per week whereas ABC would collect only once
per week. The author also points out that, although both companies have the same number of
trucks, EZ has ordered additional trucks. Finally, the author cites a recent survey in which 80%
of respondents indicated that they were satisfied with EZ's service. I find this recommendation
specious on several grounds.
First of all, the fact that EZ collects trash twice as often as ABC is significant only if the town
would benefit from an additional collection each week. Yet the author provides no evidence
that this is the case. For all we know, one collection per week suffices to dispose all of the
town's trash. If so, then on the basis of frequency of collection it would make no sense to favor
EZ's costlier service over ABC's less expensive one.
Secondly, the fact that EZ has ordered more trucks proves little in itself about which service
would be the better choice for Walnut Grove. Perhaps EZ does not plan to use its new trucks
for collecting Walnut Grove's trash. For that matter, perhaps EZ does not use its entire current
fleet for this purpose, whereas ABC would. Besides, the author does not indicate when EZ will
receive its new trucks; the later the delivery date, the less significant this factor should be in
Walnut Grove's decision.
Thirdly, the mere fact that most respondents to a recent survey considered EZ's service
satisfactory provides little support to the author's recommendation. The author fails to provide
assurances that these respondents are representative of the overall population of people
whose trash EZ collects. Moreover, even if that population is generally satisfied it is entirely
possible that they would be even more satisfied with ABC's services.
In sum, the recommendation is not well supported. To bolster it the letter's author must
provide specific evidence that Walnut Grove would benefit from an additional trash collection
each week, and that the use of additional trucks would improve service to Walnut Grove. To
better assess the strength of the recommendation I would need more information about the
demographic profile of the survey's respondents. It would also be helpful to obtain opinions
from municipalities and individuals that have some experience with both EZ and ABC.























Argument 16
The following appeared in an editorial in a Prunty County newspaper.
"In an attempt to improve highway safety, Prunty County recently lowered its speed limit from
55 miles per hour to 45 on all major county roads. But the 55 mph limit should be restored,
because this safety effort has failed. Most drivers are exceeding the new speed limit and the
accident rate throughout Prunty County has decreased only slightly. If we want to improve the
safety of our roads, we should instead undertake the same kind of road improvement project
that Butler County completed five years ago: increasing lane widths and resurfacing rough
roads. Today, major Butler County roads still have a 55 mph speed limit, yet there were 25
percent fewer reported accidents in Butler County this past year than there were five years
ago."
This editorial argues that a recent reduction in Prunty County's speed limit on its major roads,
from 55 to 45 miles per hour (mph), has proven ineffective, and that the county should
therefore restore its 55-mph speed limit and improve its roads. To support this argument the
editorial's author points out that the accident rate has decreased only "slightly" since the speed
limit was reduced. The author also points out that in nearby Butler County, which has
maintained a 55-mph limit while widening and resurfacing its roads, the accident rate has
decreased by 25% over the last 5 years. The editorial suffers from several problems, which
render it unconvincing as it stands.
First of all, Prunty only "recently" reduced its speed limit, and only for "major" roads. Perhaps
not enough time has passed to determine the effectiveness of this change in reducing the
accident rate--especially if the new speed limit remains untested during a season of the year in
which better driving conditions prevail. Additionally, the editorial refers only to the overall
accident rate countywide. Perhaps the accident rate on the county's major roads has
decreased while on minor roads not subject to the speed-limit reduction it has increased. Thus
lacking reliable evidence of the effectiveness of the new speed limit it is difficult to accept the
conclusion that Pmnty's safety effort has failed.
Secondly, the argument assumes that all other factors affecting highway accident rates have
remained unchanged since the county lowered its speed limit. Yet the author fails to provide
evidence to support this assumption. It is entirely possible that the lower speed limit does in
fact serve to reduce the accident rate, while some other factor, such as unseasonably poor
weather, reduced law enforcement measures, or even an influx of teenage drivers to the area,
has served to increase the accident rate. Without considering and ruling out these and other
factors that might have served to increase the accident rate since the speed limit was lowered,
the author cannot justifiably conclude that this safety effort has failed.
Thirdly, the author unfairly implies that the higher speed limit in Butler County has not served
to increase the incidence of road accidents in that county. It is entirely possible that the 55-mph
speed limit actually serves to increase the accident rate on Butler's high ways, but that others
factors, such as stricter law enforcement measures or improved driver education, have served
to decrease the accident rate to a greater extent. Without considering and ruling out these and
other factors which might have served to decrease the accident rate in Butler County, the
author cannot confidently recommend that Prunty County emulate Butler's speed-limit policy.
Moreover, the cited statistic involves only "reported" accidents in Butler County. It is possible
that an increasingly large percentage of accidents are going unreported in that county.
In conclusion, the editorial fails to convince me that Prunty County should emulate Butler
County's road-safety measures. To strengthen the argument the author must account for all
other factors that might influence the accident rate on roads in both counties. To better assess
the impact of the new speed limit on road safety, I would need more statistical information
about the accident rate on Prunty's major roads, collected over a longer time period. I would
also need to know what percentage of road accidents in Butler County go unreported.























Argument 17
The following appeared in a letter from the manager of a rock band named Double Rice.
"One year ago, tickets for Double Rice's concerts in stadiums around the country took, on
average, at least 24 hours to sell out, if they sold out at all. But the band has been enjoying a
surge in nationwide popularity among 14 to 25 year olds, and the 30,000 tickets for a recent
concert in Megalopolis sold out in 12 minutes. Clearly the ticket sales in Megalopolis are a
result both of the band's increased popularity and of the advertising campaign run in
Megalopolis by the Ad Lib advertising agency. Thus, in order to ensure that the band's success
in Megalopolis is repeated across the country, the band should hire Ad Lib to duplicate the
Megalopolis ad campaign on a nationwide scale."
The manager of the rock band Double Rice (DR) concludes that the band should hire the
advertising agency Ad Lib to promote the band throughout the country. To justify this
conclusion the manager cites Ad Lib's campaign to promote a recent DR concert at a large
venue in Megalopolis. Tickets for this concert sold out in 12 minutes, whereas one year ago
tickets for DR concerts at large venues rarely sold out in less than 24 hours--if at all. The
manager reasons that the Megalopolis success must have been attributable to both Ad Lib's
efforts and DR's popularity. The manager's argument is flawed in several critical respects.
To begin with, assuming that the Megalopolis success was in fact due to DR's popularity
there, the manager overlooks the possibility that Ad Lib's campaign had nothing to do that
popularity. Perhaps the band recently became overwhelmingly popular due to a new hit song
or to a revival of the type of music DR plays. Either scenario, if true, would serve to undermine
the manager's claim that Ad Lib's efforts are to be credited for the Megalopolis success.
The manager also overlooks the possibility that one or more factors other than Ad Lib's
efforts or DWs popularity were instead responsible for the Megalopolis success. For instance,
perhaps DR shared the bill at the concert with another band, whose appearance was the
actual reason for the concert's success. If so, this fact would seriously weaken the manager's
claim that the Megalopolis success is attributable to Ad Lib's efforts and to DR's popularity in
Megalopolis--whether or not that popularity resulted from Ad Lib's campaign.
Even assuming that either DR's popularity or Ad Lib's campaign, or both, were responsible
for the Megalopolis success, the manager's claim that this success can be repeated elsewhere
might nevertheless be unwarranted. Megalopolis might not be representative of most dries in
which DR plans to appear in any one of various ways which would adversely impact ticket
sales in other dries. For instance, perhaps DR hails from Mega lopolis and has far more fans in
Megalopolis than any other city. Or, perhaps the kind of ad campaign that is Ad lab's specialty,
although effective in Megalopolis, would not be effective in most dries.
Finally, in conduding that DR must hire Ad Lib in order to ensure similar success throughout
the country, the manager assumes that Ad Lib's services are both necessary and sufficient for
this purpose. Yet the manager has not provided any evidence to substantiate either
assumption. Lacking such evidence, it is just as likely that some other ad agency would be
equally or more effective. Even ifad Lib's services are necessary to achieve the manager's
goal, it is entirely possible that Ad Lib's services would not suffice to ensure similar success
elsewhere--due to the sorts of factors mentioned above that might have contributed to the
Megalopolis success but would not come into play in other dries.
In sum, the manager has not convinced me that DR's interests would be well served if and
only ifit hires Ad Lib to promote the band throughout the country. To bolster the argument the
manager must rule out all other possible reasons for the success of the Megalopolis concert,
and must show that Ad Lib is capable of achieving similar success in other cities.























Argument 18
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of the Balmer Island Gazette.
"The population of Balmer Island increases to 100,000 duing the summer months. To reduce
the number of accidents involving mopeds and pedestrians, the town council of Balmer Island.,
should limit the number of mopeds rented by each of the island's six moped and bicycle rental
companies from 50 per day to 30 per day during the summer season. By limiting the number of
rentals, the town council is sure to attain the 50 percent reduction in moped accidents that was
achieved last year in the neighboring island of Torseau, when Torseau's town council enforced
similar limits on moped rentals."
The author of this editorial recommends that to reduce accidents involving mopeds and
pedestrians Balmer Island's city council should restrict moped rentals to 30 per day, down from
50, at each of the island's six rental outlets. To support this recommendation the author cites
the fact that last year, when nearby Torseau Island's town council enforced similar measures,
Torseau's rate of moped accidents fell by 50%. For several reasons, this evidence provides
scant support for the author's recommendation.
To begin with, the author assumes that all other conditions in Balmer that might affect the
rate of moped-pedestrian accidents will remain unchanged after the restrictions are enacted.
However, with a restricted supply of rental mopeds people in Balmer might purchase mopeds
instead. Also, the number of pedestrians might increase in the future; with more pedestrians,
especially tourists, the risk of moped-pedestrian accidents would probably increase. For that
matter, the number of rental outlets might increase to make up for the artificial supply
restriction per outlet--a likely scenario assuming moped rental demand does not decline.
Without considering and ruling out these and other possible changes that might contribute to a
high incidence of moped-pedestrian accidents, the author cannot convince me that the
proposed restrictions will necessarily have the desired effect.
Next, the author fails to consider other possible explanations for the 50% decline in
Torseau's moped accident rate last year. Perhaps last year Torseau experienced unusually fair
weather, during which moped accidents are less likely. Perhaps fewer tourists visited Tot sean
last year than during most years, thereby diminishing the demand for rental mopeds to below
the allowed limits. Perhaps last year some of Torseau's moped rental outlets purchased new
mopeds that are safer to drive. Or perhaps the restrictions were already in effect but were not
enforced until last year. In any event, a decline in Torseau's moped accident rate during only
one year is scarcely sufficient to draw any reliable conclusions about what might have caused
the decline, or about what the accident rate will be in years ahead.
Additionally, in asserting that the same phenomenon that caused a 50% decline in moped
accidents in Torseau would cause a similar decline in Balmer, the author relies on what might
amount to an unfair analogy between Balmer and Torseau. Perhaps Balmer's ability to enforce
moped-rental restrictions does not meet Torseau's ability; if not, then the mere enactment of
similar restrictions in Balmer is no guarantee of a similar result. Or perhaps the demand for
mopeds in Torseau is always greater than in Balmer. Specifically, if fewer than all available
mopeds are currently rented per day from the average Balmer outlet, while in Torseau every
available moped is rented each day, then the proposed restriction is likely to have less impact
on the accident rate in Balmer than in Torseau.
Finally, the author provides no evidence that the same restrictions that served to reduce the
incidence of all "moped accidents" by 50% would also serve to reduce the incidence of
accidents involving "mopeds and pedestrians" by 50%. Lacking such evidence, it is entirely
possible that the number of moped accidents not involving pedestrians decreased by a greater
percentage, while the number of moped-pedestrian accidents decreased by a smaller
percentage, or even increased. Since the author has not accounted for these possibilities, the
editorial's recommendation cannot be taken seriously.
In conclusion, the recommendation is not well supported. To convince me that the proposed
restriction would achieve the desired outcome, the author would have to assure me that no
changes serving to increase Balmer's moped-pedestrian accident rate will occur in the
foreseeable future. The author must also provide dear evidence that last year's decline in
moped accidents in Torseau was attributable primarily to its moped rental restrictions rather
than to one or more other factors. In order to better evaluate the recommendation, I would
need more information comparing the supply of and demand for moped rentals on the two
islands. I would also need to know the rate of mopedpedestrian accidents in Torseau both prior
to and after the restrictions were enforced in Torseau.























Argument 19
The following appeared in a memo from the new vice president of Sartorian, a company that manufactures men's clothing.
"Five years ago, at a time when we had difficulties in obtaining reliable supplies of high-quality
wool fabric, we discontinued production of our deluxe alpaca overcoats. Now that we have a
new fabric supplier, we should resume production. This coat should sell very well: since we
have not offered an alpaca overcoat for five years and since our major competitor no longer
makes an alpaca overcoat, there will be pent-up customer demand. Also, since the price of
most types of clothing has risen in each of the past five years, customers should be willing to
pay significantly higher prices for alpaca overcoats than they did five years ago, and our
company profits will increase."
In this memo the vice president of Sartorian, a clothing manufacturer, argues that by resuming
production of alpaca (wool) overcoats, after discontinuing production of these coats five years
ago due to an unreliable alpaca supply, Sartorian would increase its profits. To support this
argument the vice president points out that Sartorian now has a new fabric supplier, and
reasons that since Sartorian's chief competitor has discontinued making these coats there
must be pent-up consumer demand for them which Sartorian would fill. The vice president also
reasons that, since overall dothing prices have risen in each of the last five years, consumers
will be willing to pay higher prices for Sartorian's alpaca coats. I find the argument specious in
several respects.
To begin with, the argument relies on the assumption that the new fabric supplier will be a
reliable supplier of alpaca. Yet the memo provides no substantiating evidence for this
assumption. Perhaps the supply problems Sartorian experienced years earlier were
attributable not to its supplier at the time but rather to factors beyond any supplier's control and
which might render the alpaca supply unreliable today as well. Besides, without evidence to
the contrary it is entirely possible that Sartorian's new supplier will turn out to be unreliable and
to be blameworthy for that unreliability.
Even if the new supplier turns out to be reliable, the memo assumes too hastily, on the basis
of a competitor's discontinuing alpaca coat production, that consumer demand for alpaca coats
made by Sartorian is now pent-up. Perhaps that competitor stopped making alpaca coats due
to diminishing consumer demand for them. Or, perhaps other clothing manufacturers are now
beginning to fill the market void by producing similar coats. Either of these scenarios, if true,
would cast serious doubt on the vice president's claim that there is now pent-up alpaca coat
demand from which Sartorian would profit.
Even if the vice president can substantiate the two foregoing assumptions, the argument
relies on the additional assumption that consumers will be willing to pay whatever price
Sartorian requires to turn a profit on its alpaca coat sales. Yet, perhaps Sartorian's costs for
alpaca wool will be so high as to preclude any profit from alpaca coat sales. Also, the fact that
clothing prices have been steadily increasing for five years suggests that consumers might
have less disposable income for purchasing items such as alpaca coats, espedally if
consumers' income has not kept pace with escalating prices. Thus without stronger evidence
that consumers would be both willing and able to pay high prices for Sartorian's alpaca coats
the vice president cannot convince me that the proposed course of action would be a profitable
one.
Finally, even if Sartorian would turn a profit from the sale of its alpaca coats, the memo's
claim that the company's overall profits would increase thereby is unwarranted. Sartorian's
overall profitability is a function of revenue and expenses relating to all of Sartorian's products.
Since the memo provides no evidence that Sartorian will continue to be profitable in other
respects, I simply cannot take the vice president's argument seriously.
In sum, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To bolster it the vice president must
provide assurances that the new supplier will be a reliable and affordable alpaca supplier, and
that consumers will be able and willing to pay whatever prices Sartorian requires in order to
mm a profit from selling its alpaca coats. To better assess the argument I would need to know
whether consumers are demanding alpaca coats anymore, and if so whether new competitors
entering the alpaca coat market would thwart Sartorian's efforts to profit from any pent-up
demand for these coats. I would also need detailed financial projections for Sartorian, to
determine the likelihood that it will continue to be profitable overall, aside from its predicted
profitability from alpaca coat sales.























Argument 20
The following appeared in a memo from the president of a company that builds and sells new homes in Steel City.
"Over the past five years, the population of Steel City has increased by more than 20 percent,
and family incomes in Steel City have risen much faster than the national average. Nationwide,
sales of houses priced above $150,000 have increased more than have sales of lower-priced
houses. Such data indicate that we should make changes in our business to increase
company profits. First, we should build fewer low-priced houses than we did last year and
focus instead on building houses designed to sell at above $150,000. Second, we should hire
additional workers so that we can build a larger total number of houses than we did last year."
In this memo the president of a new-home construction firm in Steel City concludes that the
firm can increase its profits by focusing on building expensive homes, priced above $150,000,
rather than lower-priced homes, and by hiring additional workers to increase the number of
homes the firm can build. To support this recommendation the president cites the fact that
Steel City's population has increased by more than 20% over the last five years and that family
income in Steel City is rising much faster than the nationwide average. The president also
points out that nationwide sales of homes priced above $150,000 are rising faster than sales of
lower-priced homes. In several respects, this evidence provides little credible support for the
president's recommendation.
First, by citing Steel City's population increase in order to argue for a step-up in home
construction, the speaker relies on certain unsubstantiated demographic assumptions. One
such assumption is that area demand for new housing will support additional home
construction in the foreseeable future. Yet lacking finn evidence that this will be the case,it is
entirely possible that the area's population will stabilize, or even decrease, and that the firm will
have trouble selling its new homes at profitable levels. Another unfair demographic assumption
is that Steel City residents will be interested in purchasing more expensive single-family
homes. Perhaps the population increase has been and will continue to be the result of an influx
of retired people who regardless of their income level are interested in smaller, less expensive
homes and condominiums, or even rental housing.
Secondly, by citing Steel City's fast-rising family-income levels to support the
recommendation, the speaker relies on other tenuous assumptions. One such assumption is
that area residents interested in buying new homes can afford homes priced over $150,000. It
is entirely possible that in Steel City family-income levels are rising rapidly primarily among
current homeowners who would not be in the market for new homes in the foreseeable future,
or among only a handful of the area's wealthiest residents. It is also possible that despite the
rapid increase the average family income in Steel City is still low compared to national
averages--too low to justify the president's recommendation to shift focus to more expensive
homes.
Thirdly, even if this firm builds and can sell expensive homes according to the president's
proposal, the firm's profits would not necessarily increase as a result. Hiring additional workers
adds to the expense of building a home, and of course the cost of materials will no doubt
increase with the value of the homes that are built. Furthermore, in all likelihood the firm would
not be able to build a greater number of expensive homes than cheaper homes. Moreover,
given the scant evidence that area residents could actually afford expensive homes, it is
entirely possible that the firm would have trouble selling these homes quickly and at profitable
price levels. In short, without a detailed cost-benefit analysis the president cannot convince me
that the proposed course of action would increase this firm's profits.
In conclusion, the president's argument is unpersuasive. To strengthen it the president must
convince me that in the foreseeable future Steel City residents will actually demand and be
able to afford houses costing more than $150,000. To better evaluate the argument I would
need more information about Steel City's demographic trends and about the income of area
residents interested in buying new homes in the foreseeable future. I would also need a
detailed analysis comparing the costs and revenues associated with the proposed course of
action with the costs and revenues associated with the construction and sale of the firm's less
expensive homes.























Argument 21
"A recent sales study indicated that consumption of seafood dishes in Bay City restaurants has
increased by 30 percent over the past five years. Yet there are no currently operating city
restaurants that specialize in seafood. Moreover, the majority of families in Bay City are
two-income families, and a nationwide study has shown that such families eat significantly
fewer home-cooked meals than they did a decade ago but at the same time express more
concern about eating healthily. Therefore, a new Bay City restaurant specializing in seafood
will be quite popular and profitable."
This argument's conclusion is that a new Bay City restaurant specializing in seafood would
be both popular and profitable. To justify this conclusion the argument points out that seafood
consumption in Bay City's restaurants has risen by 30% during the last five years. Also, the
argument points out that most Bay City families are two-income families, and cites a national
survey showing that two-income families eat out more often and express more concern about
eating healthily than they did ten years ago. I find the argument unpersuasive, for several
reasons.
First, a 30% increase in seafood consumption at Bay City restaurants does not necessarily
indicate a sufficient demand for a new Bay City restaurant serving seafood dishes only.
Although a 30% increase seems significant, the actual level of consumption might
nevertheless be very low. This scenario is quite possible, especially considering that there are
currently no seafood restaurants in Bay City. Lacking evidence that a significant number of the
city's restaurant patrons are ordering seafood, the argument's conclusion that a new seafood
restaurant would be popular and profitable is unjustified.
Secondly, even if current demand would otherwise support an increase in the availability of
seafood at Bay City's restaurants, the argument unfairly assumes that Bay City's restaurant
patrons who order seafood would frequent the new restaurant. Perhaps the vast majority of
these patrons would remain loyal to their favorite restaurant. Thus lacking evidence that these
patrons would be willing to try the new restaurant the argument's claim that a new seafood
restaurant would be popular is dubious.
Thirdly, the nationwide study showing clear trends among two-income families toward dining
out and eating healthily does not necessarily apply to Bay City. It is quite possible that Bay
City's two-income families do not follow these general trends. For that matter, in Bay City the
trend might be just the opposite. Thus the nationwide trends that the argument cites amount to
scant evidence that Bay City residents in particular would frequent a new seafood restaurant in
their city.
Fourth, even if most of Bay City's families are following the nationwide trends indicated
above, it is unreasonable to infer that these famih'es will necessarily patronize a new seafood
restaurant in Bay City. For all we know Bay City might boast a variety of health-oriented
restaurants that do not specialize in seafood. For that matter, perhaps Bay City's existing
restaurants are responding to the trends by providing more healthful dishes. Moreover,
perhaps either or both of these trends will soon reverse themselves--at least in Bay City--for
whatever reason. Any of these scenarios, if true, would cast considerable doubt on the
argument's conclusion that a new seafood restaurant in Bay City would be popular and
profitable.
Finally, even if Bay City families flock to the new seafood restaurant, the restaurant would
not necessarily be profitable as a result. Profitability is a function of both revenue and expense.
Thus it is entirely possible that the restaurant's costs of obtaining high-quality, healthful
seafood, or of promoting the new restaurant, might render it unprofitable despite its popularity.
Without weighing revenue against expenses the argument's conclusion is premature at best.
In sum, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To bolster it the argument's author must
show--perhaps by way of a reliable citywide study--that the demand among restaurant patrons
for seafood is sufficient to support a new seafood restaurant, and that a sufficient number of
people who order fish at Bay City restaurants will be able and willing to at least try the new
restaurant. The author would also bolster the argument by providing reliable evidence that Bay
City reflects the nationwide trends cited, and that these trends will continue in the foreseeable
future in Bay City. Finally, to better assess the argument I would need detailed cost and
revenue estimates for a new Bay City seafood restaurant--to determine the likelihood that
even a popular such restaurant would turn a profit.























Argument 22
The following appeared in a memo from the president of Viva-Tech, a manufacturer of high-tech medical equipment.
"In order to reduce costs, we should close some of our existing small assembly plants and
build a large central plant. Grandview would be an ideal location for this new plant. First, of the
locations that we have considered, Grandview has the largest adult population, so that we will
be able to staff our plant quickly and easily. Second, since the average wage earned by
workers in Grandview is less than that in the other locations, we should be able to keep
production costs low. Last, as an inducement for us to build there, Grandview's town council
has offered to allow us to operate for the first three years without paying city taxes."
In this memo the president of Viva-Tech, a high-tech medical equipment firm, recom mends
closing its small assembly plants and centralizing its operations at one location--in the city of
Grandview. To support this recommendation the president points out certain attractive
demographic features, as well as the town's willingness to allow Viva-Tech to operate there
without paying property taxes for the first three years. However, careful scrutiny of the
evidence reveals that it provides little credible support for the president's recommendation.
To begin with, the fact that Grandview's adult population is larger than that of any other
locale under consideration is scant evidence in itself that Grandview would be the best location
for Viva-Tech. Perhaps Grandview's adult residents are not skilled to work in the medical
equipment industry. Or perhaps a large portion of its residents are retired. Or perhaps virtually
all of its residents are already employed in jobs that they would be unwilling or unable to leave
to work at Viva-Tech. Without considering and eliminating these and other possible reasons
why Viva-Tech might have difficulty finding enough suitable employees in Grandview, the
president cannot rely on the fact that Grandview has a large adult population to bolster the
recommendation.
Furthermore, the fact that the earnings of the average Grandview worker are comparatively
low does not necessarily mean that Viva-Tech could minimize labor costs by employing
Grandview residents, as the president suggests. It is entirely possible that this low average
wage is attributable to a high percentage of jobs requiring low-level skills. This scenario would
be particularly likely if a large portion of Grandview's workers are teenagers and college
students. In fact, the low average wage in Grandview is further evidence that Grandview
residents do not possess the sorts of high-tech skills that would command a higher wage and
which Viva-Tech might require among its work force.
A final problem with the argument involves Grandview's willingness to forego payment of
property taxes for the first three years. Admittedly, this evidence lends some measure of
support to the recommendation. However, the president ignores the possibility that other cities
under consideration would be willing to make similar concessions, or provide other equally
attractive financial incentives. The president also overlooks the expense of property taxes over
the longer term. Lacking evidence to the contrary, it is entirely possible that Grandview's
property-tax rates are otherwise comparatively high, and that in the longer term Viva-Tech's
property-tax liability would be greater in Grandview than in other locales. Until the president
accounts for these two possibilities, I cannot be persuaded that Grandview is the best location
for Viva-Tech from a property-tax stand-point.
In the final analysis, the recommendation of Viva-Tech's president is not well supported. To
strengthen it the president must provide detailed demographic evidence showing that a
sufficient number of Grandview residents would be able and willing to work in Viva Tech's
high-tech environment. A proper evaluation of the recommendation requires more information
about Grandview's property-tax rates vis-a-vis those of other locales under consideration, and
about the willingness of these other municipalities to provide their own financial or tax
incentives to Viva-Tech.























Argument 23
The following appeared in a memo from the mayor of the town of Hopewell.
"Two years ago, the town of Ocean View built a new municipal golf course and resort hotel.
During the past two years, tourism in Ocean View has increased, new businesses have
opened there, and Ocean View's tax revenues have risen by 30 percent. The best way to
improve Hopewell's economy, and generate additional tax revenues, is to build a golf course
and resort hotel similar to those in Ocean View."
In this memo HopeweU's mayor recommends that in order to stimulate the town's economy
and boost tax revenues HopeweU should build a new golf course and resort hotel, just as the
town of Ocean View did two years ago. To support this recommendation the mayor points out
that in Ocean View during the last two years tourism has increased, new businesses have
opened, and tax revenues have increased by 30%. I find the mayor's argument unconvincing
in several important respects.
First of all, it is possible that the mayor has confused cause with effect respecting the recent
developments in Ocean View. Perhaps Ocean View's construction of a new golf course and
hotel was a response to previous increases in tourism and business development increases
that have simply continued during the most recent two years. Since the mayor has failed to
account for this possibility, the claim that Hopewell would boost its economy by also
constructing a golf course and hotel is completely unwarranted.
Secondly, the mayor fails to account for other possible causes of the trends in Ocean View
during the last two years. The increase in tourism might have been due to improving economic
conditions nationwide, or to unusually pleasant weather in the region. The new businesses
that have opened in Ocean View might have opened there irrespective of the new golf course
and hotel. And, the 30% increase in tax revenues might have been the result of an increase in
tax rates, or the addition of a new type of municipal tax.
Without ruling out these and other alternative explanations for the three recent trends in
Ocean View, the mayor cannot reasonably infer based on those trends that Hopewell's
economy would benefit by following Ocean View's example.
Thirdly, even if the recent trends in Ocean View are attributable to the construction of the new
golf course and hotel there, the mayor assumes too hastily that the golf course and hotel will
continue to benefit that town's overall economy. The mayor has not accounted for the
possibility that increased tourism will begin to drive residents away during tourist season, or
that new business development will result in the town's losing its appeal as a place to visit or to
live. Unless the mayor can convince me that these scenarios are unlikely I cannot accept the
mayor's recommendation that Hopewell follow Ocean View's example.
Finally, the mayor's argument rests on the unsubstantiated assumption that Hopewell and
Ocean View are sufficiently alike in ways that might affect the economic impact of a new golf
course and hotel. Hopewell might lack the sort of natural environment that would attract more
tourists and new businesses to the town--regardless of its new golf course and hotel. For that
matter, perhaps Hopewell already contains several resort hotels and golf courses that are not
utilized to their capacity. If so, building yet another golf course and hotel might amount to a
misallocation of the town's resources--and actually harm the town's overall economy.
In sum, the mayor's recommendation is not well supported. To bolster it the mayor must
provide better evidence that Ocean View's new golf course and hotel and not some other
phenomenon--has been responsible for boosting Ocean View's economy during the last two
years. To better assess the recommendation I would need to know why Ocean View decided
to construct its new golf course and hotel in the first place--specifically, what events prior to
construction might have prompted that decision. I would also need to thoroughly compare
HopeweU with Ocean View--especially in terms of their appeal to tourists and businesses--to
determine whether the same course of action that appears to have boosted Ocean View's
economy would also boost Hopewell's economy.























Argument 24
The following appeared in a memo from the chairperson of the school board in the town of Saluda.
"For the past five years, Mr. Charles Schade has been the music director at Steel City High
School, and during that time the school band from Steel City High has won three regional band
competitions. In addition, the quality of the music rehearsal facilities and musical instruments
at Steel City High has improved markedly over the past five years. Because of such successes
at Steel City High, the Saluda school board should hire Mr. Schade to plan and direct the
general music education programs for the entire Saluda school system."
In this memo the chairperson of the Saluda school board recommends hiring Schade, Steel
City High's music director for the past five years, to plan and direct the school district's general
music-education programs. To support this recommendation the chairperson points out that
over the past five years Steel's band has won three regional awards and that the school's
facilities and instruments have improved markedly. However, close scrutiny of this evidence
reveals that it lends little support for the recommendation.
First of all, the chairperson unfairly assumes that the three band awards were attributable to
Schade's abilities and efforts. Lacking evidence to confirm this assumption, it is entirely
possible that Schade was not the school's band instructor when the band won these awards.
Or, perhaps the band won all three awards early in Schade's tenure, and his predecessor is to
be credited. For that matter, perhaps it was the improved quality of the band's musical
instruments that should be credited for the awards. After all, the chairperson provides no
evidence that Schade was actually responsible for this improvement. Without considering and
ruling out other possible reasons why the band won the awards the chairperson cannot
convince me of Schade's abilities or, in mm, that he should be appointed to the district job.
Even if Schade is to be credited for the band's awards, it is possible that the skills that
Schade possesses and which resulted in the band's winning these awards are not the same
skills required for the district position. For example, perhaps Schade's music-conducting ability
or his ability to motivate individual students was responsible for the band's award winning
performances. If so, then the fact that Steel's band won these awards would amount to scant
evidence at best that Schade would make an effective administrator for the district.
Next, the chairperson unfairly assumes that improvements in the school's music facilities
and instruments are attributable to Schade's efforts. If they are, then I would agree that Schade
might possess valuable administrative skills that would serve the district well. Yet, just because
these improvements occurred during Schade's tenure it is unreasonable to assume that
Schade is to be credited for them. It is entirely possible that the improvements were the result
of another administrator's efforts, or even the efforts of parents. Without showing dearly that
Schade, and not some other person, was responsible for the improvements, the chairperson
cannot convince me that Schade possesses the administrative abilities needed for the district
job.
Finally, in recommending Schade for the job the chairperson fails to consider other possible
job candidates. Even if all the evidence shows that Schade is well-qualified, perhaps one or
more other individuals would be even more suitable for the job. Without addressing this
possibility the chairperson cannot convince me that the district should hire Schade.
In conclusion, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To convince me that Schade would
be effective in the new job, the chairperson must provide dear evidence that the band's awards
and especially the improvements cited are attributable to Schade's abilities and efforts, and
that these abilities would translate directly to those required for the district position. Finally, to
better evaluate the argument I would need to compare Schade's qualifications with those of
other possible job candidates.























Argument 25
The following appeared as part of a memo from the president of Automate, a company that manufactures automobiles.
"It has come to my attention that Sparks, Inc., the manufacturing company that just moved into
our state, is advertising job openings at salaries that are twice as high as those paid to our
experienced assembly-line workers. Some of our employees have already left to work for
Sparks. In order to keep our best staff, we must pay them salaries equal to those Sparks pays
its employees. Otherwise we will continue to lose employees in the future, because Sparks
must staff the additional new plants that it plans to build in the state."
In this memo the president of Automate, an automobile manufacturer, concludes that to
retain its best employees Automate must offer them salaries equal to those that Sparks
automobile manufacturing pays its employees. To justify this conclusion the president points
out that Sparks has just moved into the state and is now advertising job openings with salaries
twice as high as those Automate pays its assembly-line workers, and that some Automate
employees have already defected to Sparks. As further support for the argument, the president
notes that Sparks plans to build additional plants in the state and will need to staff those plants.
I find the argument unconvincing on several grounds.
First, the memo does not indicate what kinds of jobs Sparks is now advertising--the ones for
which salaries are to be twice those paid to Automate's assembly-line workers. Those jobs
might be top management positions or other jobs for which salaries are often significantly
higher than those for assembly-line work. If so, this fact would serve to refute the president's
assumption that Sparks is paying higher s~lades than Automate for similar work.
Secondly, the president assumes that the reason why some Automate workers have
defected to Sparks is that Sparks has offered them higher salaries. Yet, the president fails to
provide evidence to substantiate this assumption. Lacking such evidence, those defectors
might have gone to work for Sparks because the city where Sparks is located is a preferable
place to live, or because Sparks offers other job incentives that Automate does not.
And, if the defectors accepted jobs at Sparks before Sparks began offering higher salaries,
then salary could not have been a factor in their decision to defect to Sparks. In short, until the
president establishes a clear causal relationship between the advertised salaries and the
defection of some Automate employees to Sparks, the president cannot reasonably conclude
that Automate must increase its salaries in order to prevent additional employees from
defecting to Sparks in the future.
Thirdly, even assuming that those defectors did leave Automate because Sparks offered
higher salaries for similar work, the president's argument rests on the additional assumptions
that the number of defectors is significant and that these defectors are valuable to Automate.
Yet the president fails to substantiate either assumption. Perhaps only a very small percentage
of Automate's worker's have defected; if so, the president's proposed salary increases might
amount to an overreaction. Or, perhaps the defectors were among Automate's least valuable
employees; for that matter, perhaps Automate's most valuable employees are the ones who
are most loyal and would not leave Automate even if they were offered a higher salary
elsewhere. Without substantiating both assumptions, the president cannot reasonably
conclude that Automate must raise the salaries of its best workers in order to retain them.
Finally, the mere fact that Sparks plans to build additional new plants in the state amounts to
scant evidence that Automate will continue to lose valuable employees unless it raises their
salaries. Perhaps Sparks plans to staff those new plants with workers from its other plants, or
from other sources besides Automate. Or, perhaps Sparks is advertising high salaries now
simply to gain a foothold into the state's labor market, and that once Sparks is established in
the state it will offer lower salaries for new jobs. Besides, Sparks' plan to build additional plants
might amount to sheer speculation, in which case the president's proposed salary increases
would seem hasty.
In sum, the president's recommendation seems ill-conceived, at least lacking additional
supporting evidence. To bolster the argument the president must provide clear evidence that a
significant percentage of Automate's valuable employees have defected to Sparks because
Sparks offered them higher salaries for similar work rather than for some other reason. The
president must also provide better evidence that this is a trend that is likely to continue and to
harm Automate's operations unless Automate boosts the salaries of its best employees to
match the salaries Sparks would pay those employees.























Argument 26
The following is a memo from the superintendent of the Mylar school district.
"A recent six-month study, in which breakfast was made available at school for 100
schoolchildren ages five to twelve, found that children on the breakfast plan were less likely
than other children to be absent from or late for school. Clearly, eating breakfast before school
plays a role in reducing student absenteeism and tardiness. It is also well known that children
who regularly eat a healthful breakfast tend to perform better in school. Therefore, in order to
reduce absenteeism and tardiness and to improve academic performance in all of Mylar's
elementary and secondary schools, we should provide breakfasts for all students before each
school day."
In this memo the superintendent of the Mylar school district concludes that by providing
breakfast to all its students the district would reduce tardiness and absenteeism as well as
improve the overall academic performance of its students. To support this conclusion the
superintendent points out that during a 6-month trial program involving 100 students ranging in
age from 5 to 12, these students were less likely to be tardy or absent than other students. The
superintendent also cites the well-known fact that eating healthful breakfasts on a regular
basis improves academic performance. The superintendent's argument is problematic in
several respects, rendering the argument unconvincing as it stands.
The argument's chief problem is that it relies on numerous unsubstantiated assumptions
about the 6-month study. One such assumption is that the participants' regular and punctual
attendance was attributable to the fact that breakfasts were provided. Yet logic and common
sense inform me that the results might have been due instead to one or more other factors.
Perhaps these particular students were compelled to show up punctually and regularly for
some other reason. Perhaps the 100 participants were comparatively reliable and disciplined
children who are less likely in any event to be late for school. Or perhaps the participants are
relatively healthy and therefore less likely to be absent from school than the average student.
Moreover, it is uncertain whether the program's participants even ate the breakfasts that the
trial program provided. In short, without considering and ruling out alternative explanations for
the study's results, the superintendent cannot justifiably conclude that the results are due to
the fact that breakfasts were provided to participating students.
Even if the participants' punctual and regular attendance was due to the breakfasts provided
to them, the statistical reliability of the trial program's results is questionable. The number of
participants, 100, might constitute an insufficiently small sample to draw any reliable
conclusions about how district students 5-12 years of age would behave under similar
conditions---as a group. The larger this group compared to the sample of 100 participants, the
less reliable the study's results. Also, the sample might be unrepresentative of district students
as a group. For example, perhaps the 100 participants happened to be children who eat small
dinners and are therefore hungry for breakfast.
Even if the 100 participants are statistically representative of district students 5-12 years of
age, one cannot infer that older, secondary-school students would behave similarly under
similar conditions. Yet by concluding that the district should implement the program for its
secondary-school students as well, the superintendent seems to assume without supporting
evidence that this is the case. In short, lacking assurances that the 100 participants are
statistically representative of all district students, the superintendent can not draw any reliable
conclusions based on the study.
Aside from the problems involving the 6-month study, the superintendent's conclusion that
the overall academic performance of district students would improve under the proposed
program is unwarranted. By relying on the fact that eating healthful breakfasts on a regular
basis improves academic performance, the superintendent assumes that the district's
breakfasts would be healthful and that students would eat them on a regular basis.
Yet no evidence is offered to substantiate these crucial assumptions. It is entirely possible
that the district's breakfasts would not be sufficiently healthful, or that district students would
not eat these breakfasts regularly. In fact, the superintendent has not shown either that the trial
program's participants or that the broader population of district students would eat healthful
breakfasts, or any breakfast at all, under any circumstances.
In conclusion, the superintendent's argument is specious. To bolster it she must provide
clear evidence that the 100 participants in the trial program actually attended school regularly
and punctually because of the breakfasts provided, and that these 100 students are
statistically representative not only of other 5-12 year-olds but of older students as well--as a
group. Finally, to better evaluate the daim that the program would improve academic
performance I would need more information about the healthfulness of the breakfasts provided
under the proposed program.























Argument 27
The following appeared in a popular health and fitness magazine.
"A ten-year study of a group of 552 men from Elysia showed that long-term consumption of
caffeinated black tea was associated with a much lower risk of stroke. Of these men, those
who drank more than three cups of black tea a day had a 70 percent lower risk of stroke than
those who drank no tea. These results suggest that health-conscious people should consume
at least three cups of black tea a day, beginning early in life."
This magazine article concludes that in order to reduce the risk of stroke people should
consume at least three cups of black tea per day, beginning at an early age. To justify this
conclusion the artide cites a 10-year study involving 552 men from Elysia. Among these men
those who consumed at least three cups of caffeinated black tea each day were at 70% lower
risk of stroke than those who consumed no tea. Based on this evidence, I find the article's
conclusion to be unjustified in several respects.
To begin with, the article's author provides no evidence that the study's two groups were
otherwise at similar risk of stroke. Lacking such evidence, it is entirely possible that the
difference in stroke risk is attributable to some other phenomenon. Perhaps the average age of
the tea drinkers was significantly lower than that of the other group. Assuming that stroke risk
generally increases with age, this scenario would provide an equally plausible explanation for
the difference in stoke risk between the two groups. Or, perhaps the tea-drinkers tended to
engage in other activities that reduced their stroke risk, or to avoid activities that increased that
risk, whereas the other group did not.
Even assuming that Elysian men do indeed reduce stroke risk by drinking three cups of
black tea each day, it is nevertheless unfair to infer that women and non-Elysians would
benefit similarly from drinking black tea. Perhaps women do not derive this same benefit from
black-tea consumption; for that matter, perhaps for women the author's prescrip tion would
actually increase stroke risk. Also, perhaps Elysians have certain other habits or certain
inherited traits needed for a person to reduce his or her stroke risk by drinking black tea
habits or traits which are far less common among non-Elysians.
Even if any person would reduce his or her risk of stroke by drinking at least three cups of
black tea each day, the author overlooks the possibility that stroke risk can just as effectively
be reduced by other means as well. Some other type of tea or herb might be just as beneficial
in this respect, or perhaps even more so. Or, people who weigh less than the men in the study
might derive the maximum benefit from black tea by drinking less than three cups per day. For
that matter, perhaps drinking 3 cups or more would amount to a harmful overdose for these
people. Without accounting for these possibilities the author's recommendation seems
premature at best.
Finally, even if all adult men and women would reduce their stroke risk by following the
author's prescribed regimen for up to a ten-year period, it is possible that following this
regimen for a longer period would actually harm one's health. Without the benefit of a longer
study---one in which subjects consume black tea daily from an early age up until an age at
which strokes are likely in any event, the author simply cannot justify the advice that
health-conscious people adhere to the prescribed regimen from an early age.
In sum, the argument is weak as it stands. To strengthen it the author must provide evidence
that the study's two groups were similar in all other ways that might possibly affect their risk of
stroke, and that it was the tea itself rather than some other habit--that caused the
comparatively low risk of stroke among the tea-drinking group. The author must also show that
women and non-Elysians benefit similarly from the prescribed amount of black tea. To better
assess the argument it would be useful to know what alternatives are available for reducing
stroke risk, whether the benefits of drinking black tea vary with age or body weight, and the
potential longer-term health hazards of consuming black tea on a daily basis.























Argument 28
The following appeared in a report of the Committee on Faculty Promotions and Salaries at Elm City University.
"During her seventeen years as a professor of botany, Professor Thomas has proved herself to
be well worth her annual salary of $50,000. Her classes are among the largest at the university,
demonstrating her popularity among students. Moreover, the money she has brought to the
university in research grants has exceeded her salary in each of the last two years. Therefore,
in consideration of Professor Thomas' demonstrated teaching and research abilities, we
recommend that she receive a $10,000 raise and a promotion to Department Chairperson;
without such a raise and promotion, we fear that Professor Thomas will leave Elm City
University for another college."
In this report an Elm City University committee recommends increasing Professor Thomas'
salary and promoting her to Department Chairperson because of her effectiveness as a
teacher and researcher. To support this recommendation the report points out that Thomas'
classes are among the University's most popular and that last year the amount of grant money
she attracted to the University exceeded her $50,000 salary. The committee argues further
that unless the University implements its recommendation Thomas is likely to defect to another
school. For several reasons, the evidence offered in support of the recommendation provides
little credible support for it.
First, the recommendation relies on the assumption that the popularity of Thomas' classes is
attributable to her effectiveness as a teacher. Yet this assumption overlooks other possible
reasons for the popularity of these classes. Perhaps Thomas is a comparatively lenient grader;
or perhaps the classes she teaches are requirements for every science student. Without
considering and eliminating these and other possible alternative explanations for the popularity
of Thomas' classes, the committee cannot convincingly condude based on that popularity that
Thomas is an effective teacher and therefore should be granted a raise and a promotion.
Secondly, the mere fact that the amount of grant money Thomas attracted to the University
last year exceeded her salary proves nothing about either her teaching abilities or her research
abilities. Perhaps last year was an aberration, and in other years Thomas did not attract much
grant money. For that matter, perhaps many--or even most--other professors at the University
attracted even more grant money than Thomas, relative to their salary levels. Under either
scenario, Thomas would appear undeserving of the recommended raise and promotion
based on this particular criterion.
Thirdly, the report provides no evidence whatsoever regarding the likelihood that Thomas
would leave the University if she is not granted the proposed raise and promotion. Lacking
such evidence, it is entirely possible that Thomas is quite content in her current position and at
her current salary level. Thus the committee cannot justifiably rely on this daim to bolster its
recommendation.
In conclusion, the committee's recommendation is ill-founded. To strengthen it the
committee must provide dear evidence that Thomas is in fact an effective teacher--perhaps by
citing student or peer evaluations. The committee must also provide specific evidence of
Thomas' research abilities--perhaps by listing scientific journals that have published the results
of her work. Finally, to better evaluate the argument I would need more information about the
degree to which Thomas is content in her current position and at her current salary, and
whether any other University would be willing to offer her a more attractive employment
package.























Argument 29
The following appeared in a newsletter distributed at a recent political rally.
"Over the past year, the Consolidated Copper Company (CCC) has purchased over one
million square miles of land in the tropical nation of West Fredonia. Mining copper on this land
will inevitably result in pollution and environmental disaster, since West Fredonia is home to
several endangered animal species. But such disaster can be prevented if consumers simply
refuse to purchase products that are made with CCC's copper until the company abandons its
mining plans."
The author of this newsletter excerpt condudes that if consumers refuse to buy products
made with Consolidated Copper Company (CCC) copper the company will eventually abandon
its mining plans in the nation of West Fredonia, thereby preventing pollution and an
"environmental disaster" in that country. To justify this conclusion the author points out that
CCC has recently bought more than a million square miles of land in West Fredonia, and that
West Fredonia is home to several endangered animal species. I find this argument specious
on several grounds.
First, the author provides no evidence that the West Fredonia land that CCC has acquired
amounts to a significant portion of land inhabited by endangered animal species, or that CCC's
land is inhabited by endangered animal species at all. Nor does the author provide clear
evidence that CCC's mining activities are of the type that might cause pollution, the extinction
of animal species, or any other environmental damage. Lacking such evidence the author
simply cannot convince me that CCC must abandon its plans in order that such damage be
prevented.
Secondly, even assuming CCC's planned mining activities in West Fredonia will cause
pollution and will endanger several animal species, it is nevertheless impossible to assess the
author's broader contention that CCC's activities will result in "environmental disaster,'' at least
without an agreed-upon definition of that term. If by "environmental disaster" the author simply
means some pollution and the extinction of several animal species, then the claim would have
merit; otherwise, it would not. Absent either a clear definition of the term or dear evidence that
CCC's activities would carry grave environmental consequences by any reasonable definition,
the author's contention that CCC's activities will result in environmental disaster is simply
unjustified.
Thirdly, the author's position that environmental disaster is "inevitable" absent the prescribed
boycott precludes the possibility that other measures can be taken to prevent CCC from
carrying out its plans, or to offset any harm that CCC causes should it carry out its plans. Yet
the author fails to provide assurances that no other means of preventing the predicted disaster
are available. Lacking such evidence the author cannot reasonably conclude that the
proposed boycott is needed to prevent that disaster.
Finally, even if the prescribed boycott is needed to prevent pollution and environmental
disaster in West Fredonia, the author assumes too hastily that the boycott will suffice for these
purposes. Perhaps additional measures would be required as well. For instance, perhaps
consumers would also need to boycott other companies that pollute West Fredonia's
environment. In short, without any evidence that the recommended course of action will be
enough to prevent the predicted problems, the author's conclusion remains dubious at best.
In sum, as it stands the argument is wholly unpersuasive. To bolster it the author must show
that CCC's planned mining activities on its newly acquired land will pollute and will threaten
endangered animal species. The author must also define "environmental disaster'' and show
that the inevitable results of CCC's activities, absent the proposed boycott, would meet that
definition. To better assess the argument it would be useful to know what other means are
available for preventing CCC from mining in West Fredonia or, in the alternative, for mitigating
the environmental impact of those mining activities. A/so useful would be any information
about the likelihood that the boycott would be effective in accomplishing its intended
objectives.























Argument 30
The following appeared as a letter to the editor of a national newspaper.
"The article entitled 'Eating Iron' in last month's issue of Eating for Health reported that a recent
study found a correlation between high levels of iron in the diet and an increased risk of heart
disease. Further, it is well established that there is a link between large amounts of red meat in
the diet and heart disease, and red meat is high in iron. On the basis of the study and the
well-established link between red meat and heart disease, we can conclude that the
correlation between high iron levels and heart disease, then, is most probably a function of the
correlation between red meat and heart disease."
In this argument the author dtes a study correlating the amount of iron in a person's diet with
the person's risk of heart disease. The author also cites a well-established correlation between
diets that indude large amounts of red meat, which is high in iron, and the incidence of heart
disease. The author concludes that the correlation observed in the study is a function of the
correlation between read meat and heart disease. This argument suffers from a series of poor
assumptions, which render it wholly unpersuasive as it stands.
To begin with, the author provides no evidence that the study's results are statistically
reliable. In order to establish a strong correlation between dietary iron and heart disease, the
study's sample must be suffident in size and representative of the overall population of
heart-disease victims. Lacking evidence of a suffidenfly representative sample, the author
cannot justifiably rely on the study to draw any conclusion whatsoever.
Even assuming that the study is statistically reliable, a direct correlation between a high-iron
diet and heart disease does not necessarily prove that the former causes the latter. While a
high correlation is strong evidence of a causal relationship, in itself it is not suffident. The
author must also account for all other possible factors leading to heart disease, such as
genetic propensity, amount of exercise, and so forth. Lacking evidence that the heart-disease
sufferers whom the study observed were similar in all such respects, the author cannot
justifiably conclude that a high-iron diet is the primary cause, or even a contributing cause, of
heart disease.
Similarly, a correlation between a diet, which includes large amounts of red meat and heart
disease, does not necessarily infer a causal relationship. Lacking evidence to the contrary, it is
possible that red-meat eaters are comparatively likely to incur heart disease due to factors that
have nothing to do with the amount of red meat in their diet. Perhaps red-meat eaters are the
same people who generally overeat, and it is obesity rather the consumption of red meat
specifically that causes heart attacks. The author must consider and eliminate this and other
possible reasons why red-meat eaters are more likely than other people to suffer from heart
disease. Otherwise, I cannot accept the author's implidt daim that eating red meat is any more
likely to cause heart disease than eating other foods.
Even assuming that a high-iron diet, including a diet high in red meat, promotes heart
disease, the author cannot reasonably conclude that this causal relationship fully explains the
study's results. The author overlooks the possibility that other foods are also high in iron, and
that the study's participants ate these other foods as well as, or instead of, red meat. Without
accounting for this possibility the author cannot convincingly conclude from the study that red
meat is the chief cause of heart disease.
In conclusion, the argument unfairly assumes that correlation is tantamount to causation. To
strengthen the argument, the author must provide dear evidence that a high-iron diet
contributes to heart disease. The author must also provide dear evidence that people who eat
red meat are more likely to incur heart disease because of the amount of red meat in their diet,
rather than some other factor. To better evaluate the reliability of the study upon which the
author's conclusion depends, I would need more information about the size and makeup of the
study's sample. I would also need to know whether other foods are also high in iron and, if so,
which high-iron foods the study's participants ate on a regular basis.























Argument 31
"Your recent article on corporate downsizing* in the United States is misleading. The article
gives the mistaken impression that many competent workers who lost jobs as a result of
downsizing face serious economic hardship, often for years, before finding other suitable
employment. But this impression is contradicted by a recent report on the United States
economy, which found that since 1992 far more jobs have been created than have been
eliminated. The report also demonstrates that many of those who lost their jobs have found
new employment. Two-thirds of the newly created jobs have been in industries that tend to pay
above-average wages, and the vast majority of these jobs are full-time."
*Downsizing is the process in which corporations deliberately reduce the number of their
employees.
This editorial disagrees with a certain article's claim that as a result of widespread corporate
downsizing many able workers have faced serious long-term economic hardship--due to their
inability to find other suitable employment. To justify its disagreement with this daim the
editorial cites the following three findings of a recent report: (1) There has been a net increase
in the number of new jobs created since 1992, (2) many workers who lost their jobs have found
other work, and (3) most newly created jobs are full-time positions in industries which tend to
pay above-average wages. Careful scrutiny of these findings, however, reveals that they
accomplish little toward refuting the article's claim.
Regarding the fu:st finding, the editorial overlooks the possibility that most of the newly
created jobs since 1992 are not suitable for job-seekers downsized by corporations. Perhaps
the vast majority of these jobs involve food serving, clerical assistance, deanmg and
maintenance, and other tasks requiring a low level of skill and experience. At the same 6me,
perhaps most downsized job-seekers are highly educated middle-managers looking for the
same type of work elsewhere. In short, lacking evidence that the newly created jobs match the
skills, experience, and interests of the downsized corporate employees, the editorial's author
cannot convincingly refute the article's claim.
As for the second finding, the term "many" is far too vague to allow for any meaningful
conclusions; if "many" amounts to an insignificant percentage of downsized employees, then
the finding is of little use in refuting the article's claim. Moreover, the workers to whom this
finding refers are not necessarily downsized corporate employees. To the extent that they are
not, this second finding is irrelevant in drawing any conclusions about the impact of corporate
downsizing on downsized employees.
The third finding would lend support to the author's position only under two assumptions: (1)
that the newly created jobs in those high-paying industries are suitable for downsized
corporate employees, and (2) that the new jobs are among the high-paying ones. Otherwise,
downsized employees seeking jobs would be unlikely to regain their former economic status
by applying for these newly created positions, whether or not these positions are full-time.
In sum, the author has not effectively refuted the article's claim that corporate downsizing
has worked economic hardship on downsized corporate employees. To more effectively refute
the claim the author should provide clear evidence that most of those job-seekers are able to
fill the sorts of new jobs that have been created since 1992, and that these new positions are
suitable for those job-seekers given their work experience, areas of interest, and former
salaries.


























Argument 32
"According to a poll of 200 charitable organizations, donations of money to nonprofit groups
increased by nearly 25 percent last year, though not all charities gained equally. Religious
groups gained the most (30 percent), followed by environmental groups (23 percent), whereas
educational institutions experienced only a very small increase in donations (3 percent). This
poll indicates that more people are willing and able to give money to charities but that funding
for education is not a priority for most people. These differences in donation rates must result
from the perception that educational institutions are less in need of donations than are other
kinds of institutions."
In this argument the author cites a poll showing that the amount of charitable donations
increased last year, but that the increase to educational institutions was far less than to either
religious or environmental groups. Based on this evidence the author condudes that more
people are willing and able to make charitable donations, but that education is not a priority for
most people. The author also concludes that the discrepancy among donation rates is the
result of a general perception that educational institutions are in less need of money than other
insttutons are. This argument depends on several unsubstanuated assumptions and is
therefore unpersuasive as it stands.
First of all, the author's conclusions about people's willingness to donate to the three types
of charities listed depend on the assumption that the poll results are statistically reliable. Yet,
the author offers no evidence to substantiate this assumption. The author must show that the
200 charitable organizations polled constitute a sufficiently large sample of religious,
environmental, and educational charities, and that this sample is representative of all such
charities. Otherwise, the author cannot confidently draw any general conclusions about the
willingness of people to donate to these three types of institutions, or about general
perceptions regarding the needs of any such institutions.
Similarly, the author's sweeping claim that "more people are willing and able to give money
to charities" depends on the assumption that the poll results are sufficiently representative of
charitable giving in general. Yet, the author offers no evidence to substantiate this assumption.
The author must show that the 25% total increase in the rate of donations to the three types of
institutions polled is representative of the increase in donations to all types of charities. The
author must also show that the total number of donors actually increased last year; as it stands
the argument leaves open the possibility that the total number of donors decreased last year
while the average amount given by each donor increased. Absent evidence to support these
assumptions, the author's broad contusion that "more people are willing and able" to make
charitable donations is dubious at best.
Additionally, the author provides no evidence whatsoever for the claim that educational
institutions are perceived as less needy than other institutions, or that this perception explains
the lower donation rate to educational institutions. Lacking such evidence, there are many
other possible explanations for the discrepancy in donation rates. Perhaps people's perception
is that educational institutions are more likely than the other types to squander or misuse
donated money; or perhaps most donors are simply more interested in advocating religions or
environmental protection than in subsidizing education. For that matter, perhaps among all
charitable organizations educational institutions ranked third last year in terms of gifts received
bettered only by religious and environmental charities. Such evidence would serve to
undermine the author's claim that funding for education is "not a priority for most people."
In conclusion, the argument is indefensible as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
assure me that the poll results accurately reflect donation rates not only to all religious,
environmental, and educational institutions but also to the broader group of all charitable
institutions. The author must also provide clear evidence for the claimed perception about the
need of educational institutions and that this perception, and not some other factor, explains
the comparatively low donation rate to these institutions.























Argument 33
"A new study collected data that shows that people who snore are more likely to gain weight
than are people who do not snore. It is well known that many people who snore also stop
breathing frequently during the night for a few seconds, a condition called sleep apnea. The
interruption of breathing wakes the person---often so briefly that the waking goes
unnoticed---and can leave the person too tired during the day to exercise. Anyone who snores,
therefore, should try to eat less than the average person and to exercise more."
In this argument the speaker concludes that any person who snores should try to eat less
and exercise more than the average person. To justify this conclusion the speaker points out
that many snorers awaken frequently during sleep--often so briefly that they are unaware that
they are awake in order to catch their breath (a condition called sleep apnea), and as a result
are too fired during normal waking hours to exercise. The speaker also cites data collected
during a recent study, suggesting that snorers are more likely to gain weight than other people.
This argument is flawed in several critical respects.
First, the speaker provides no assurances that the recently collected data suggesting a
correlation between snoring and weight gain are statistically reliable. Perhaps the study's
subjects were unrepresentative of the overall population in terms of other traits and habits
that might affect body weight. Lacking such evidence the speaker simply cannot draw any firm
conclusions based on the study about the relationship between snoring and weight gain.
Even assuming a strong correlation between snoring and weight gain among the general
population, the speaker has not adequately shown that sleep apnea causes weight gain. A
correlation is one indication of a causal relationship, but in itself does not suffice to prove such
a relationship. It is entirely possible that some other medical condition, or some other trait or
habit, that causes snoring also causes weight gain. Without establishing dearly that snoring at
least contributes to weight gain, the speaker cannot convince me that snorers should either eat
less or exercise more than the average person.
Even ifmany snorers suffer from sleep apnea and tend to gain weight as a result, the
speaker's advice that "anyone who snores" should try to eat less and to exercise is new
ertheless unwarranted. It is entirely possible that some--or perhaps even most--snorers do not
suffer from sleep apnea, or are not too tired to exercise, or do not in any event tend to gain
weight. Without ruling out these possibilities, the speaker must expressly limit the advice to
those snorers whose snoring causes weight-gain.
Even if the speaker's advice were modified as indicated above, the advice to exercise would
still be logically unsound. If a person with sleep apnea is too tired to exercise as a result, then
simply advising that person to exercise begs the question: What should the person do to
eliminate the cause of the tiredness? Thus the speaker should determine the cause of sleep
apnea and modify the advice so that it targets that cause. Of course, ifit turns out that weight
gain is one cause of snoring and sleep apnea, then the speaker's advice that snorers should
try to eat less would have considerable merit. Yet, without any evidence that this is the case,
the speaker's advice might be at least partially ineffective in counteracting a snorer's tendency
to gain weight.
In sum, the speaker's advice for "any" snorer is ill-conceived and poorly supported. To lend
credibility to this advice the speaker should provide evidence that the recently collected data
reflect the general population. To better assess the argument it would be useful to know all the
possible causes of snoring and of sleep apnea.























Argument 34
The following appeared in the editorial section of a local newspaper.
"The librarians in our town's school system have reported that the number of trips that our
students make to their school library on a voluntary basis has decreased significantly in recent
years. For example, the average seventh-grade student visited the school library five times
last year, but four of those visits were part of required classroom activities. This shows that our
students are reading less than in the past. To address this problem, our town needs to improve
the atmosphere of the libraries so that they will be comfortable places in which to work. If
students view the libraries as uncomfortable, then they are unlikely to want to spend much time
there."
In this editorial the author claims that the town's students are reading less, and that by
improving the atmosphere in the town's school libraries students would visit their school library
more frequently and, in turn, would read more. To support these claims the author points out
that the number of annual visits students make to their school library, on average, has
decreased significantly in recent years. Specifically, the average seventh grader paid five such
visits last year, four of which were required for classes. Close inspection of the evidence
reveals, however, that it lends little credible support for the proposed course of action.
First, the author unfairly assumes that since the number of library visits per student is
declining the amount of reading on the part of students must also be declining. This poor
assumption overlooks the possibility that students are doing more reading or checking out
more reading materials during each library visit. It also ignores the possibility that more and
more students are obtaining reading material elsewhere--for example, from public libraries or
from the Internet. Without considering and ruling out these possibilities, the author cannot
justifiably conclude that students are reading less merely because they are visiting their school
library less often.
Secondly, the author assumes that the reason for the declining number of library visits is that
the library is uncomfortable. Yet, the author offers no evidence to substantiate this assumption.
Lacking such evidence, a variety of other factors might account for the decline. As noted above,
perhaps students are becoming less dependent on the school library for obtaining reading
material and information. Besides, lacking evidence to the contrary it is entirely possible that
library atmosphere is completely insignificant to most students.
Thirdly, the author assumes that improving atmosphere and comfort is necessary to reverse
the current trend. However, even if the surroundings go unchanged there might be other ways
to attract students to their library. Perhaps increasing the number of computer terminals or the
number of staff members would reverse the current trend. Or perhaps increasing the number
of books and periodicals, or enhancing their variety, would be effective. In short, without ruling
out all other possible means of achieving the desired results, the author cannot convince me
that the proposed course of action is necessary.
Finally, the author assumes that improving the library's atmosphere would suffice to increase
the frequency of student visits and the amount of reading on the part of students. Yet, the
author offers no evidence that these improvements alone would suffice. In fact, a more
comfortable library might actually discourage students from reading by creating a social rather
than work atmosphere.
In sum, the recommendation is not well supported. To strengthen the argument the author
must provide clear evidence that the school's students are in fact reading less and that if they
visit the school library more frequently they will read more. The author must also provide
evidence--perhaps by way of a student survey--that the library atmosphere is the chief
determinant of the frequency with which students visit the library. Finally, to better evaluate the
argument I would need to know what alternatives, if any, are available for increasing the
frequency with which students visit their library, and for increasing the amount that students
read.























Argument 35
The following appeared in an editorial in a business magazine.
"Although the sales of Whirlwind video games have declined over the past two years, a recent
survey of video-game players suggests that this sales trend is about to be reversed. The
survey asked video-game players what features they thought were most important in a video
game. According to the survey, players prefer games that provide lifelike graphics, which
require the most up-to-date computers. Whirlwind has just introduced several such games with
an extensive advertising campaign directed at people 10 to 25 years old, the age-group most
likely to play video games. It follows, then, that the sales of Whirlwind video games are likely to
increase dramatically in the next few months."
This editorial concludes that a two-year decline in sales of Whirlwind's video games is about
to reverse itself, and that sales will increase dramatically in the next few months. To justify this
conclusion the editorial's author cites a recent survey in which video-game players indicated a
preference for games with realistic graphics requiting state-of-the art computers. The editorial
then points out that Whirlwind has just introduced several such games, along with an extensive
advertising campaign aimed at people 10-25 years old---the demographic group most likely to
play video games. I find this argument specious on several grounds.
First, the author provides no assurances that the survey on which the argument depends is
statistically reliable. Unless the survey's respondents are representative of the overall
population of video-game enthusiasts, the author cannot rely on it to predict the success of
Whirlwind's new games. For all we know a significant percentage of the respondents were not
10-25 years of age; for that matter, perhaps the number of respondents was too low to ensure
that they are typical of video-game enthusiasts in that age group.
Secondly, the argument relies on the assumption that the two-year decline in Whirlwind's
sales is attributable to a problem that Whirlwind's introduction of its new games and ad
campaign will solve. Yet it is enfixely possible that the decline was due to factors such as
imprudent pricing and distribution strategies or poor management, and that these problems
have not been remedied. In fact, perhaps the same advertising agency that is promoting
Whirlwind's new games also promoted Whirlwind's earlier games, and it was the agency's
inability to attract interest among the key demographic group that caused the decline. Since
the author has not dearly identified the cause of the decline, I cannot be convinced that
Whirlwind's new strategy will reverse that decline at all let alone dramaticaUy.
Thirdly, even if the ad campaign successfully attracts many 10-25 year-olds to Whirlwind's
new games, the argument rests on the further assumption that this result will suffice to cause
the predicted sales increase during the next few months. Yet this need not be the case.
Perhaps Whirlwind's new state-of-the-art games are prohibitively expensive for the key
demographic group. Or perhaps Whirlwind's competitors are now introducing similar games at
lower prices or with additional features that render them more attractive to video-game
enthusiasts than Whirlwind's new games. Unless the author can rule out such possibilities, I
simply cannot be swayed by the prediction that Whirlwind is about to experience a dramatic
increase in sales.
Finally, even if the author can substantiate the foregoing assumptions, I remain unconvinced
that the impending increase in sales will occur within the next few months. Perhaps
video-game sales are highly seasonal and Whirlwind will need to wait longer than two months
to see the dramatic increase it expects. If so, the author must modify the prediction
accordingly.
In sum, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must provide
clear evidence that video-game enthusiasts 10-25 years of age would be interested in
Whirlwind's new games, and that they could afford to buy them. To better assess the argument
I would need to know (1) what caused the two-year sales decline to begin with, and whether
Whirlwind's new strategy eliminates that cause; (2) what competing products might serve to
diminish sales of Whirlwind's new games during the next few months; and (3) when
Whirlwind's introduction of its new games has occurred in relation to the peak video-game
sales season, if any.























Argument 36
The following appeared in the editorial section of Monroetown's local newspaper.
"Mayor Brown was recently re-elected by a clear majority of 52 percent of Monroetown's voters.
Her re-election, however, does not show that most people in our town favored Mayor Brown's
proposal for tax reduction over that of her opponent, Mr. Greene, who proposed raising taxes
to improve education. It has been shown that voters nationwide tend to re-elect people already
in office, regardless of candidates' proposals. In fact, a local survey after the election showed
most people in Monroetown disagreed with Mayor Brown's proposal. Clearly most people in
Monroetown favor improving education and therefore approve of Mr. Greene's proposal
despite the fact that they did not vote for him."
The author of this editorial concludes that most Monroetown residents favor Greene's
proposal to raise taxes in order to improve education over Brown's proposal to cut taxes, even
though incumbent Brown defeated Greene by way of a 52O/o majority vote in a recent mayoral
election. To support this condusion the author points out a nationwide tendency to reelect
incumbent candidates regardless of their positions. The author also points out that a survey
taken after the election showed that most Monroetown residents oppose Brown's proposal. As
the following discussion shows, the author's argument is not well supported by the evidence.
First of all, the author unfairly assumes that the nationwide tendency applies specifically to
Monroetown residents. Lacking evidence that Monroetown voters reflect this general tendency,
it is entirely possible that Monroetown residents vote strictly according to their position on the
issues. For that matter, it is possible that Monroetown voters tend strongly to vote against
incumbents, in which case the author's claim that Monroetown residents oppose Brown's
proposal would more flagrantly fly in the face of the election results.
Secondly, the author fails to indicate when the statistics showing this nationwide tendency
were collected. The longer the time period between the collection of these statistics and the
election, the greater the possibility that the tendency has changed over this time span, and the
less justifiable the author's reliance on these statistics to support the claim that Monroetown
residents oppose Brown's proposal.
Thirdly, the author fails to indicate how much time passed between the Brown-Greene
election and the survey showing that most Monroetown residents oppose her proposal. If the
survey was conducted immediately after the election, then the fact that the election results
conflict with the survey results would cast considerable doubt on the reliability of either to
indicate what proposals Monroetown residents truly support. However, if the survey occurred
long after the election, then the conflict can readily be explained by changing opinions and
demographics over time. In either case, it is impossible to weigh the evidence without more
specific information about percentages. The larger the percentage of Monroetown residents
participating in the election, the greater the extent to which the election results would cast
doubt on the survey results. By the same token, the larger the percentage of Monroetown
residents shown by the survey to oppose Brown's proposal the more clearly this evidence
would support the author's argument.
Finally, the argument suffers from "either-or" reasoning. Based on the fact that Monroetown
residents are opposed to Brown's proposed tax cut, the author unfairly concludes that they
must be in favor of Greene's proposal. However, the author overlooks the possibility that
Monroetown residents are not in favor of either proposal.
In sum, the author's argument that Monroetown residents oppose Brown's proposal and are
in favor of the proposals set forth by Greene is unconvincing. To strengthen the argument the
author must provide clear evidence that Monroetown residents voted contrary to their own
positions on the issues when they reelected Brown. To better evaluate the argument I would
need to know how much time passed between the collection of the statistics showing the
national tendency cited by the author and the election. I would also need to know how much
time passed between the election and the survey showing that Monroetown residents oppose
Brown's proposal. Finally, I would need to know what portion of Monroetown's residents voted
in the election, and what portion of these residents were shown by the survey to oppose
Brown's policies.























Argument 37
The following is a memorandum from the director of personnel to the president of Get-Away Airlines.
"Since our mechanics are responsible for inspecting and maintaining our aircraft, Get-Away
Airlines should pay to send them to the Quality-Care Seminar, a two-week seminar on proper
maintenance procedures. I recommend this seminar because it is likely to be a wise
investment, given that the automobile racing industry recently reported that the performance of
its maintenance crews improved markedly after their crews had attended the seminar. These
maintenance crews perform many of the same functions as do our mechanics, including
refueling and repairing engines. The money we spend on sending our staff to the seminar will
inevitably lead to improved maintenance and thus to greater customer satisfaction along with
greater profits for our airline."
In this memorandum Get-Away Airline's personnel director asserts that Get-Away
mechanics should enroll in the Quality Care Seminar on proper maintenance procedures in
order to increase customer satisfaction and, in turn, profits. The director reasons that because
the performance of auto-racing mechanics improves after the seminar, so will that of
Get-Away's mechanics. The director's argument relies on a number of dubious assumptions
and is therefore unconvincing.
First of all, the argument unfairly assumes that because the performance of auto-racing
mechanics improves after the seminar so will the performance of aircraft mechanics. Common
sense tells me that, even though aircraft and auto mechanics serve similar functions, aircraft
repair and maintenance is far more involved than car repair and maintenance. Thus, a seminar
that improves the performance of auto mechanics will not necessarily improve that of aircraft
mechanics.
Secondly, the argument assumes that the performance of Get-Away mechanics is subject to
improvement. However, it is entirely possible that their performance level is already very high
and that the seminar will afford little or no improvement. Perhaps Get-Away's mechanics have
already attended a similar seminar, or perhaps they meet higher standards than the ones
imposed on auto-racing mechanics.
Thirdly, the argument concludes from the mere fact that the performance of auto-racing
mechanics improved after the seminar that the seminar was responsible for this improvement.
However, it is possible that some other factor, such as improved diagnostic technology or more
stringent inspection requirements, was the reason for the improved performance. Without
ruling out these and other such possibilities, I cannot accept the memo's final conclusion that
enrolling in the seminar will improve the performance of Get-Away's mechanics as well.
Finally, the argument concludes without adequate evidence that improved performance on
the part of Get-Away's mechanics will result in greater customer satisfaction and therefore
greater profits for Get-Away. Admittedly, if a low performance level results in accidents,
customer satisfaction and profits will in all probability decrease. Otherwise, however, improved
mechanic performance will in all likelihood have no bearing on customer satisfaction; in other
words, customers are unlikely to be aware of the level of performance of an aircraft's
mechanics unless accidents occur.
In conclusion, the argtunent is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it, the director must
provide more convincing evidence that the performance of Get-Away's mechanics will actually
improve as a result of the seminar--perhaps by pointing out other airlines whose mechanics
benefited from the seminar. The director must also show a strong causal nexus between
improved mechanic performance and profit. In order to better evaluate the argument, I would
need more information about the cost of the seminar compared to its expected benefits, and
about what factors other than the seminar might have been responsible for the improved
performance of auto-racing mechanics.























Argument 38
The following is a letter to the editor of an environmental magazine.
"The decline in the numbers of amphibians worldwide clearly indicates the global pollution of
water and air. Two studies of amphibians in Yosemite National Park in California confirm my
conclusion. In 1915 there were seven species of amphibians in the park, and there were
abundant numbers of each species. However, in 1992 there were only four species of
amphibians observed in the park, and the numbers of each species were drastically reduced.
The decline in Yosemite has been blamed on the introduction of trout into the park's waters,
which began in 1920 (trout are known to eat amphibian eggs). But the introduction of trout
cannot be the real reason for the Yosemite decline because it does not explain the worldwide
decline."
The author of this letter concludes that a worldwide decline in the number of amphibians is
an indication, or result, of global air and water pollution. To support this assertion the author
first notes a decline in amphibians in Yosemite Park between 1915 and 1992, and
acknowledges that trout, which eat amphibian eggs, were introduced there in 1925. But, the
author then claims that the introduction of trout cannot be the reason for the decline in
Yosemite because the introduction of trout in Yosemite does not explain the worldwide decline.
I find this argument logically unconvincing in three critical respects.
First, the author fails to provide any evidence to refute the strong inference that the
amphibian decline in Yosemite was indeed caused by trout. Because the author provides no
affirmative evidence that pollution---or some other phenomenon--was instead the reason for
the decline, the author's broad assertion that a worldwide decline in amphibians indicates
global pollution is entirely unconvincing.
Secondly, even if I were to concede that the introduction of trout was not the cause of
Yosemite's amphibian decline, the author provides no evidence that the decline was caused by
pollution--rather than some other phenomenon. Perhaps some other environmental factor was
instead the cause. Without ruling out all other possible explanations the author cannot
convince me that pollution is the cause of the worldwide amphibian decline--or even the
decline in Yosemite alone.
Thirdly', even if I were to concede that pollution caused Yosemite's amphibian decline, this
single sample is insufficient to draw any general conclusion about the reason for a worldwide
amphibian decline. It is entirely possible that the cause-and-effect relationships in Yosemite
are not typical of the world in general. Without additional samples from diverse geographic
locations, I cannot accept the author's sweeping generalization about the decline of
amphibians and global pollution.
In sum, the scant evidence the author cites proves nothing about the reason for the general
decline of amphibians worldwide; in fact, this evidence only serves to refute the author's own
argument. To strengthen the argument the author should examine all changes occurring in
Yosemite between 1915 and 1992 and show that air and water pollution have at least
contributed to the park's amphibian decline. In any event, the author must provide data about
amphibian population changes and pollution at diverse geographical locations; and this data
must show a strong inverse correlation between levels of air and water pollution and
amphibian populations worldwide.























Argument 39
The following is a letter to the editor of the Atticus City newspaper.
"Former Mayor Durant owes an apology to the city of Atticus. Both the damage to the River
Bridge, which connects Atticus to Hartley, and the traffic problems we have long experienced
on the bridge were actually caused 20 years ago by Durant. After all, he is the one who
approved the construction of the bridge. If he had approved a wider and better-designed
bridge, on which approximately the same amount of public money would have been spent,
none of the damage or problems would have occurred. Instead, the River Bridge has
deteriorated far more rapidly over the past 20 years than has the much longer Derby Bridge up
the river. Even though the winters have been severe in the past several years, this is no
excuse for the negligence and wastefulness of Durant."
This editorial concludes that Mayor Durant's approval of the River Bridge construction 20
years ago was the cause of current traffic and deterioration problems at the bridge. To support
this conclusion, the editorial points out that a nearby bridge is not experiencing similar
problems. However, the editorial relies on a number of doubtful assumptions and is therefore
unconvincing.
First of all, since the bridge is 20 years old it is unfair to assign blame for recent traffic
problems and deterioration to Durant or to anyone else involved in the initial bridgebuilding
project. Given this time span it seems reasonable that these problems are due to ordinary
wear and tear rather than to a design defect. Moreover, it is entirely possible that unforeseen
developments during the last 20 years are partly responsible for the deterioration and traffic
problems. For example, perhaps growth in the area's population, and therefore increased
bridge traffic, has been greater than could have been anticipated 20 years ago.
Secondly, the editorial concludes without adequate evidence that if Durant had approved a
wider and better-designed bridge none of the current problems would have occurred. This
amounts to fallacious reasoning. Just because a bridge that Durant approved has experienced
certain problems, one cannot reasonably conclude that without that particular bridge the same
problems would not have occurred.
Thirdly, the editorial relies primarily on an analogy between River Bridge and Derby Bridge,
yet provides no evidence that the two bridges are similar in ways that are relevant to the
argument. Even assuming weather conditions are generally the same at both locations, a
variety of other factors might explain why the River Bridge problems have not occurred at the
Derby Bridge. Perhaps relatively few people traverse the Derby Bridge; or perhaps the Derby
Bridge is relatively new; or perhaps the comparatively long span of the Derby Bridge places
less structural stress on any given point. In short, without ruling out other factors that might
explain why similar problems have not occurred at the Derby bridge this argument by analogy
is untenable.
Finally, the argument assumes that mere approval of the proposed bridge is tantamount to
causation of traffic and deterioration problems. But the editorial fails to indicate why Durant
approved the bridge in the first place. It is quite possible, for example, that it was the only
feasible plan, and that Durant had no choice. Moreover, common sense tells me that
deterioration and traffic problems are consequences of poor planning and engineering, and
therefore more likely caused by negligence of engineers and planners than by politicians.
In conclusion, the editorial is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
editorial's author must provide evidence that conditions which might have contributed to the
bridge's deterioration and to traffic problems were reasonably foreseeable 20 years ago, and
that some other feasible bridge design would have avoided the current problems. In order to
better evaluate the argument, we would need more information about what choices Durant had
at the time, as well as more information about the age of the Derby bridge and about how
heavily that bridge is used compared to the River bridge.























Argument 40
The following is a letter to the head of the tourism bureau on the island of Tria.
"Erosion of beach sand along the shores of Tria Island is a serious threat to our island and our
tourist industry. In order to stop the erosion, we should charge people for using the beaches.
Although this solution may annoy a few tourists in the short term, it will reduce the number of
people using the beaches and will raise money for replenishing the sand. Replenishing the
sand, as was done to protect buildings on the nearby island of Batia, will help protect buildings
along our shores, thereby reducing these buildings' risk of additional damage from severe
storms. And since the areas along the shore will be more attractive as a result, the beaches
will be preserved and the area's tourist industry will improve over the long term."
This letter's author recommends charging fees for public access to Tria's beaches as an
effective means of raising funds for the purpose of saving Tria's tourist industry. The author
reasons that beach-access fees would reduce the number of beachgoers while providing
revenue for replenishing beach sand needed to protect nearby buildings, thereby enhancing
the area's attractiveness to tourists. To support this argument the author points out that beach
sand was replenished on the nearby island of Batia, thereby reducing the risk of storm damage
to bL~ldin~ there. I find the argument unconconvining for several reasons.
First of all, the author makes certain dubious assumptions about the impact of beach access
fees. On the one hand, the author ignores the possibility that charging fees might deter so
many tourists that Tria would be worse off overall. On the other hand, perhaps the vast
majority of Tria's tourists and residents alike would happily pay for beach access, in which
case Tria's beaches would continue to be no less crowded than they are now. Under either
scenario, adopting the author's proposal might harm, rather than benefit, Tria's tourist industry
in the long run.
Secondly, the mere fact that on nearby Batia replenishing beach sand has served to protect
shoreline buildings is scant evidence that Tria would achieve its goals by following Batia's
example. Perhaps the same course of action would be ineffective on Tria due to geological
differences between the two islands. Or perhaps Batia is in a far better position than Tria
financially to replenish its sand on a continual basis. In short, lacking evidence that conditions
on the two islands are relevantly similar, the author cannot convince me on the basis of Batia's
experience that the proposed course of action would be effective in attaining Tria's goals.
Thirdly, even if replenishing Tria's beach sand is financially feasible and would protect
nearby buildings, the author provides no evidence that Tria's tourist industry would be saved
thereby. Perhaps Tria's tourist appeal has little to do with the beach and nearby buildings; for
that matter, perhaps Tria's tourist appeal would be greater with fewer buildings along the coast.
Since the author provides no firm evidence that replenishing sand and protecting nearby
buildings would be more beneficial to Tria's tourist industry than allowing nature to take its
course, I do not find the author's argument the least bit compelling.
In sum, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must show
that charging beach-access fees would reduce the number of beachgoers, but not to the
extent of undermining the goal of raising sufficient funds to maintain an attractive coastal area.
The author must also provide better evidence that replenishing sand would indeed protect
nearby buildings, and that the net result would be the enhancement of Tria's tourist industry.























Argument 41
The following is from an editorial in the Midvale Observer, a local newspaper.
"Ever since the 1950's, when television sets began to appear in the average home, the rate of
crimes committed by teenagers in the country of Alta has steadily increased. This increase in
teenage crime parallels the increase in violence shown on television. According to several
national studies, even very young children who watch a great number of television shows
featuring violent scenes display more violent behavior within their home environment than do
children who do not watch violent shows. Furthermore, in a survey conducted by the Observer,
over 90 percent of the respondents were parents who indicated that prime-time
television--programs that are shown between 7 p.m. and 9 p.m.---should show less violence.
Therefore, in order to lower the rate of teenage crime in Alta, television viewers should
demand that television programmers reduce the amount of violence shown during prime time."
This editorial concludes that increasingly violent television programming during prime time in
the country of Alta is responsible for the steady increase in violent crime among Alta's
teenagers. To support this conclusion the editorial cites various statistical studies about
violence on television. However, this evidence provides little credible support for the editorial's
conclusion.
To begin with, the editorial observes a correlation between violence on television and violent
teenage crime, then concludes that the former is the cause of the latter. However, the editorial
fails to rule out other possible explanations for the rise in violent crime among teenagers. For
example, since the 1950s it is entirely possible that Alta has seen a large growth in its
population, or a deterioration of its juvenile justice system or economy. Any of these factors, or
other social, political or economic factors, might lead to an increase in violent crime among
teenagers. Without ruling out all other such factors it is unfair to conclude that television
programs are responsible for this increase.
Next, the editorial cites studies showing that young children exposed to violent images are
more likely to behave violently in the home. This evidence would support the editorial's
conclusion only if teenagers and younger children react similarly to television. However,
common sense tells me that young children are more likely than teenagers to mimic observed
behavior. Moreover, the editorial fails to provide any evidence that this sort of mimicry
ultimately develops into violent criminal behavior.
The editorial then cites the Observer survey in which "90% of the respondents were parents"
who would prefer less violent television programming during prime time. However, the editorial
fails to provide any information about the survey population; therefore it is impossible to
determine whether the survey results apply generally to the Alta population. In addition, we are
not informed how many parents were surveyed but did not respond. The greater this number,
the less reliable the survey. Thus, as it stands the Observer study is statistically unreliable and
lends no credible support to the editorial's conclusion.
Aside from the survey's statistical unreliability, in citing the survey the editorial assumes that
parents' preferences about television programming have some bearing on whether their
teenage children will commit violent crimes. However, the editorial provides no evidence to link
one with the other. Moreover, the survey is relevant only to the extent that teenagers watch
television during prime time. However, the editorial provides no evidence about this extent.
In conclusion, the editorial is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
editorial's author must rule out all other possible factors contributing to the rise in teenage
violence. The author must also show that teenagers react to violent television images similarly
to how younger children react to the same images, and that Alta teenagers watch a significant
amount of television programming during prime time. In order to better evaluate the argument,
we would need more information about the Observer survey population, and about the
percentage of those surveyed who responded.























Argument 42
The following appeared in the editorial section of a health and fitness magazine.
"In a study of the effects of exercise on longevity, medical researchers tracked 500
middle-aged men over a 20-year period. The subjects represented a variety of occupations in
several different parts of the country and responded to an annual survey in which they were
asked: How often and how strenuously do you exercise? Of those who responded, the men
who reported that they engaged in vigorous outdoor exercise nearly every day lived longer
than the men who reported that they exercised mildly only once or twice a week. Given the
clear link that this study establishes between longevity and exercise, doctors should not
recommend moderate exercise to their patients but should instead encourage vigorous
outdoor exercise on a daily basis."
This editorial concludes that to maximize longevity people should engage in vigorous
outdoor exercise on a daily basis. To support this conclusion the editorial cites a 20-year study
of 500 middle-aged men in which, among subjects responding to an annual survey, those who
followed this regimen lived longer, on average, than those who exercised mildly once or twice
per week. A careful analysis of the study reveals several problems with the editorial's
argument.
First of all, the excerpt provides no information about the number of respondents or their
occupational or residential profiles. The fewer respondents, the less reliable the study's results.
Also, the narrower the spectrum of occupations and geographic areas represented among
respondents, the more likely that one of these two phenomena, rather than exercise, played
the key role in the subjects' longevity. Moreover, once a subject dies it would be impossible for
that subject to respond to the annual survey. Unless a sufficient number of subjects from
diverse geographic areas and occupations responded accurately and on a regular basis, and
unless accurate responses were made on behalf of deceased subjects, I simply cannot accept
the editorial's condusion.
Secondly, a 20-year time span might not be sufficient to gauge the longevity of the study's
subjects; that is, until a significant number of subjects have died, it is impossible to determine
with certainty the effect of exercise on the subjects' longevity as a group. Lacking information
about how many deaths among the 500 subjects were reported by the end of the study, it is
impossible to draw any reliable conclusion about the relationship between exercise and
longevity.
Thirdly, the editorial fails to indicate how many or what percentage of the respondents
engaged in vigorous outdoor exercise on a daily basis. Lacking this information, it is entirely
possible that only a few subjects matched this profile and that those few subjects happened to
live to an old age--due to some factor other than exercise habits. The longevity of a small
number of respondents is scant evidence upon which to draw any broad conclusions about the
effect of exercise on longevity.
Finally, even if we accept the reliability of the study as it relates to men, the study does not
support the editorial's broad condusion that doctors should recommend to all patients vigorous
daily outdoor exercise. Since the study excluded women, it is entirely possible that a different
exercise regime would maximize female longevity.
In sum, the evidence cited in this excerpt does not permit any reliable inference about the
effect of exercise on longevity. To better assess the study's reliability I would need more
information about the number of respondents and the number of deaths among them by the
end of the 20-year period. I would also need information about the occupational and residential
history of each respondent. To strengthen the argument the editorial should either limit its
conclusion to men or provide evidence that its recommended exercise regimen also
maximizes longevity for women.























Argument 43
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of a local newspaper.
"Too much emphasis is placed on the development of reading skills in elementary school.
Many students who are discouraged by the lonely activity of reading turn away from
schoolwork merely because they are poor readers. But books recorded on audiocassette tape
provide an important alternative for students at this crucial stage in their education, one the
school board should not reject merely because of the expense involved. After all, many studies
attest to the value of allowing students to hear books read aloud; there is even evidence that
students whose parents read to them are even more likely to become able readers. Thus,
hearing books on tape can only make students more eager to read and to learn. Therefore, the
school board should encourage schools to buy books on tape and to use them in elementary
education."
This editorial concludes that the school board should invest in audiocassettes because
listening to audiocassettes makes elementary students more eager to learn and to read. To
support this conclusion the editorial cites studies showing the value of listening to someone
else read. However, dose scrutiny of this evidence and of the editorial's line of reasoning
reveals that they provide little credible support for the editorial's conclusion.
To begin with, the argument claims that for a poor reader the isolation of reading will provide
a general disincentive to do schoolwork. However, the author provides no evidence to support
this claim. It is just as possible that a child who has difficulty reading might excel at other
subjects that do not require much reading, such as mathematics or music. Besides, this
argument assumes that learning to read must be an isolated activity. Experience informs us,
however, that this is not the case, especially for elementary school students who typically learn
to read in a group environment.
The editorial goes on to cite studies which "attest to the value" of allowing students to hear
books read allowed. However, as it stands this evidence is far too vague to support the
editorial's conclusion; we are not informed whether the "value" relates specifically to reading
skills. Common sense tells me that while audiocassettes can help any person learn facts and
understand concepts, a skill such as reading can only be learned by practicing the skill itself.
Nor are we informed about the manner in which books were read allowed in the study; were
they read directly by parents or were they recorded on audiocassettes? Absent additional
information about the cited studies, these studies lend no credible support to the conclusion
that audiocassettes will help elementary school students to read and to learn.
The editorial continues by claiming that listening to audiocassettes will make children better
readers because when parents read aloud to their children these children become better
readers. This argument by analogy is wholly unpersuasive. The latter allows for interaction
between parent and child, while the former does not. The latter allows for the child to view
written words as the parent reads--that is, to read while the former does not. Besides,
common sense and experience tell us that audiocassettes, which provide for passive listening,
are likely to serve as crotches that dissuade children from active read ing--instead of
encouraging them to read.
In conclusion, the editorial is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
editorial's author must provide more compelling evidence that listening to audiocassettes will
actually help and encourage elementary school students to read, not just to learn in general. In
order to better evaluate the argument, we would need more information about whether the
cited studies refer specifically to the value of audiocassettes and specifically to their value in
terms of the reading and learning processes.
























Argument 44
The following is taken from an advertisement placed in a weekly business magazine by the Dickens Academy.
"We distributed a survey to senior management at International Mega-Publishing, Inc. The
result of the survey clearly indicates that many employees were well prepared in business
knowledge and computer skills, but lacked interpersonal skills to interact gracefully with
customers. International Mega-Publishing decided to improve customer satisfaction by
sending their newly hired employees to our one-day seminars. Since taking advantage of our
program, International Mega-Publishing has seen a sharp increase in sales, an indication that
the number of their disgruntled customers has declined significantly. Your company should hire
Dickens and let us turn every employee into an ambassador for your company."
This Dickens Academy ad claims that any company wanting to improve customer relations
will benefit from enrolling its employees in Dickens' one-day seminars. To support this claim
the ad cites Mega-Publishing's improved sales after its new employees attended Dickens'
seminar as an indication of improved customer relations. As it stands the ad rests on a series
of dubious assumptions, and is therefore unconvincing.
In the first place, the ad relies on the unsubstantiated assumption that the Mega employees
attending the seminar are positioned to influence Mega's sales and its customer relations.
Perhaps these new employees were hired for production, editorial, or personnel positions that
have nothing to do with customer relations and that have only an indirect and negligible impact
on sales. Without providing evidence that these new employees directly influence Mega's
customer relations and sales, I cannot accept the argument that the Dickens seminar was
responsible for any of Mega's sales or customer-relations improvements subsequent to the
seminar.
Even if Mega's seminar attendees are involved in sales and customer relations, the ad
unfairly assumes that the improvement in Mega's sales must be attributable to the seminar.
Perhaps the improvement in sales was the result of increasing product demand, new pricing
policies, decreased competition, or any one of a myriad of other possible developments. For
that matter, perhaps Mega's new employees as a group already possessed exceptional
interpersonal skills, and therefore Mega's sales and customer relations would have improved
during the ensuing months regardless of the seminar. Since the ad fails to consider and rule
out these and other alternative explanations for the improvements at Mega, I find the ad's daim
that the Dickens seminar should receive credit unconvincing.
Even if the Dickens seminar was responsible for improved sales and customer relations at
Mega, the ad's claim that all other businesses would benefit similarly from a Dickens seminar
is unjustified. It is entirely possible that the techniques and skills that participants in Dickens'
seminars learn are effective for the kind of business in which Mega engages, but not for other
types of businesses. Although it is possible that Dickens' training methods would be equally
effective for other types of businesses, since Dickens has not provided evidence that this is the
case I remain unconvinced by the ad's daim.
In sum, this ad fails to provide key evidence needed to support its claim. To strengthen that
claim Dickens must show that Megas seminar attendees  and not other employees or other
occurrences  were indeed responsible for the subsequent improvement in sales, and that
customer relations also improved as a result of their attending the seminar. Dikens must also
provide additional success stories  about other types of businesses  to convince me
Dickens traning methods will work for any business.
























Argument 45
The following is a letter to the editor of a local newspaper.
"As a local merchant, I wish to support the development of a ski resort in the state park north of
our township. Along with many other merchants who favor the proposal by Ski the Slopes,
Incorporated, I would, of course, experience a growth in my business. But I also know how
much more prosperous, not to mention lively and interesting, our community would be if
tourism increased. Since the main opposition comes from a few environmentalists* who do not
even live in this community, I see no reason to give in to their views. The First National Bank
has finally researched the project and agreed to fund it. As a result, I see no reason to delay
development of the resort."
*Environmentalists are people who advocate the preservation of the natural environment.
This editorial concludes that a new ski resort should be developed north of town because it
would attract tourism and therefore be an economic boon to local merchants. To support this
claim the author, a local merchant, points out that those opposed to the project do not live in
the area and that a bank has agreed to fund the project. The argument suffers from several
critical flaws and is therefore unpersuasive as it stands.
First of all, that mere fact that environmentalists who oppose the development do not live in
the town lends no credible support to the editorials conclusion. In essence the author attemps
to argue for one position by attacking his opponents based on potentially irrelevant
considerations. We are not informed about the enviromentalists specific reasons for their
position. Besides, although they do not live in the town they might operate business or own
property in the area; thus, their opposition might be based on economic grounds entirely
relevant to the argument.
Secondly, the editoral provides no firm evidence to justify the assertion that a new ski resort
north of town will in fact benefit the towns merchants. It is entirely possible that the resort
might have the opposite effect, by drawing business away from local merchants, especially if
the resort includes facilities such as apparel shops, restaurants, and grocery stores. Besides,
we are not in informed how far from town the resort would be located or how tourists would
reach the resort. It is possible, for example, that the resort would be situated where visitors
would take a route that does not pass through the town. Without ruling out these possibilities
the editorial cannot justify its assertion that the resort would be a boon for local merchants.
Thirdly, the editorals conclusion relies partly on the fact that a bank has agreed to fund the
resorts development. However, this fact alone does not lend support to the assertion that local
merchants will benefit. Common sense tells me that the bank agreed to fund the project
because it believes the resort will be profitable, not because it believes other local merchants
will benefit. In fact, a profitable ski resort might very well draw business away from local
merchants.
In conclusion, the argument is untenable as it stands. To strengthen it, the editorials author
must provide clear evidence that the resort would increase business for the towns merchants
rather than drawing business away from these merchants. To better evaluate the argument,
we would need more information about the banks reasons for agreeing to fund the project 
especially whether the bank also lends to existing local merchants whose interests would be
affected by the resort.























Argument 46
"The Trash-Site Safety Council has recently conducted a statewide study of possible harmful
effects of garbage sites on the health of people living near the sites. A total of five sites and
300 people were examined. The study revealed, on average, only a small statistical correlation
between the proximity of homes to garbage sites and the incidence of unexplained rashes
among people living in these homes. Furthermore, although it is true that people living near the
largest trash sites had a slightly higher incidence of the rashes, there was otherwise no
correlation between the size of the garbage sites and people's health. Therefore, the council is
pleased to announce that the current system of garbage sites does not pose a significant
health hazard. We see no need to restrict the size of such sites in our state or to place any
restrictions on the number of homes built near the sites."
The Trash-Site Council concludes here that there is no public-health reason to restrict the
size of trash sites or their proximity to homes. The Council cites its recent statewide study
involving five sites and 300 people; in the study the Council observed only a small correlation
between the residents proximity to a trash site and unexplained rashes, and only a slightly
higher incidence of rashes among people living near larger sites. The study suffers from
certain statistical and other problems, which render the Councils argument based upon it
unpersuasive.
First, the Council has not convinced me that the five sites in the survery are representative
of trash sites in general throughout the state  in terms of their impact on the health of nearby
residents. Admittedly, the study was a statewide one. Nevertheless, it is entirely possible that
the five sites studied are characterized by certain environmental conditions that are not typical
of most sites in the state and which render nearby residents either more or less susceptible to
rashes and other health problems.
Secondly, the 300 people in the study are not necessarily representative of the states
general population  in terms of their susceptibility to health problems. For example, perhaps
nearly all of these people are adults, while most of the health problems associated with trash
sites occur among children. Or perhaps preventative health-care programs in these particular
communities are unusually effective in preventing ealth problems. In short, lacking evidence
that these 300 people are typical in terms of their vulnerability to health problems the Council
cannot convince me that no statewide trash-site regulations are needed.
Thirdly, the Councils conclusions that the five sites studies pose no serious health hazards
to nearby residents seems premature. Common sense informs me that a serious health
problem might become apparent only after a long period of exposure to the environmental
cause of the problem. The Council fails to take into account the length of time these residents
have been exposed to the conditions created by the trash sites; and in any event, one recent
study amounts to scant evidence that the sites pose no significant long-term public-health
hazards.
In sum, the Councils argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the Council
must provide better evidence that the environmental conditions at the five sites studies
represent conditions at trash sites througouth the state, and that the 300 people studies are
representative of state residents generally in terms of vulnerability to health problems. To
better assess the argument I would need more information comparing the health of the 300
people studied before and after continual exposure to the environmental conditions associated
with the trash sites. I would also need to know the length of the study to determine whether it
adequately accounted for latent health problems.
























Argument 47
"The nation of Claria covers a vast physical area. But despite wide geographic differences,
many citizens are experiencing rising costs of electricity. A recent study of household electric
costs in Claria found that families who cooled their houses with fans alone spent more on
electricity than did families using air conditioners alone for cooling. However, those households
that reported using both fans and air conditioners spent less on electricity than those
households that used either fans or air conditioners alone. Thus, the citizens of Claria should
follow the study's recommendation and use both air conditioners and fans in order to save
money on electricity."
This argument recommends that all citizens of Claria should mn fans as well as air
conditioners, for the purpose of saving money on electricity. To support this recommendation,
the argument's proponent points out that Claria citizens who run only fans incur higher electric
costs than those who mn only air conditioners, and that those who run both incur the lowest
electric costs among the three groups. However, the argument depends on certain dubious
assumptions about climate, electric costs, and the cited statistics. As a result, the
recommendation is iU-conceived.
First, the argument relies on the assumption that climatic conditions are similar throughout
all regions of Claria. Yet this is probably not the case, especially since the passage explicitly
characterizes Claria as vast and widely diverse geographically. It is entirely possible that only
fans are used in certain regions because the climate in these regions is comparatively cold
year-round, and that electric heating costs are so high that they result in the highest overall
electric costs in the country. If this is the case, implementing the proponent's suggestion would
result in higher electric costs for citizens in these regions. Or perhaps people who run both
fans and air conditioners live in regions where there is less need for artificial cooling. This
would explain why total electric costs in these regions are comparatively low. If this is the case,
then implementing the proponent's suggestion might still result in higher electric costs for
citizens in other regions.
Secondly, the recommendation depends on the assumption that the cost of electricity is the
same for all three groups. However, it is possible that people who use both fans and air
conditioners incur the lowest total electric costs among the three groups simply because these
people pay the least per unit of electricity. The fact that Claria is geographically diverse lends
support to this notion; people who use both fans and air conditioners are likely to live in the
same climatic region, and people in the same region are more likely to be subject to the same
electricity usage rates.
Thirdly, the argument provides insufficient information about the study on which it relies. If the
results were based on only one warm season then the argument would be less persuasive
than if the results were based on more than one warm season; in other words, the larger the
statistical sample the more reliable the results.
In condusion, the recommendation for using both cooling methods is dubious at best. To
bolster it, the argument's proponent must show that climatic conditions are similar in all regions.
The proponent must also show that rates charged for electricity are similar in all regions.
Finally, in order to better evaluate the extent to which the cited study supports the
recommendation we would need more statistical information about the study's time span.























Argument 48
"As people grow older, an enzyme known as PEP increasingly breaks down the neuropeptide
chemicals involved in learning and memory. But now, researchers have found compounds that
prevent PEP from breaking neuropeptides apart. In tests, these compounds almost completely
restored lost memory in rats. The use of these compounds should be extended to students
who have poor memory and difficulty in concentrating-and therefore serious problems in
school performance. Science finally has a solution for problems neither parents nor teachers
could solve."
This argument concludes that certain compounds should be administered to students with
poor memory and concentration to improve their performance in school. The argument cites
an experiment involving rats in which the same compounds prevented the enzyme PEP from
breaking down chemicals involved in learning and memory. The argument suffers from several
flaws, which render it unconvincing.
A threshold problem with the argument is that it assumes that what improves memory and
learning in rats will also improve memory and learning in humans. Although this is entirely
possible, the argument provides no evidence to support this assumption. Without such
evidence the argument can be rejected out of hand.
A second problem involves the fact that PEP increasingly breaks down the chemicals
needed for learning and memory as humans age--as the argument points out. Yet the
argument seems to daim that inhibiting PEP will be effective in improving learning and memory
in young people. (The argument refers to students' "parents," implying that proposed human
subjects are young people rather than adults.) Thus the effectiveness of the compounds is
likely to be far less significant than it would be for older people.
A third problem with the argument is that it assumes that learning and memory are the only
significant factors affecting performance in school. Common sense and experience tells us this
is not the case, and that a variety of other factors, such as motivation and natural ability, also
play major roles. Thus the compounds might very well turn out to be largely ineffective.
A final problem with the argument is that it asserts that the compounds will improve
concentration, yet it makes no claim that the same compounds improved concentration in
rats----only that they improved the rats' learning and memory. Thus the argument's conclusion
is indefensible to this extent.
In sum, the argument is weak on several grounds. To strengthen it the argument's
proponent must provide clear evidence that the same compounds that improved learning and
memory in rats will do so in young humans. Moreover, the argument's proponent must show
that poor academic performance is due primarily to learning and memory problems, rather
than to poor concentration, motivation, or other factors.























Argument 49
"In a study of reading habits of Leeville citizens conducted by the University of Leeville, most
respondents said they preferred literary classics as reading material. However, a follow-up
study conducted by the same researchers found that the type of book most frequently checked
out of each of the public libraries in Leeville was the mystery novel. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the respondents in the first study had misrepresented their reading habits."
This argument concludes that in a certain study about reading habits Leeville citizens
misrepresented their true reading habits. To justify this conclusion, the argument points out an
apparent discrepancy between their representations and the results of a follow-up study
showing that a different type of book is the one most frequently checked out from Leeville's
public libraries. However, the argument fails to account for several other possible explanations
for this apparent discrepancy.
First of all, the argument does not indicate how much time passed between the two studies.
During a sufficiently long interim period the demographic makeup of LeeviUe might have
changed, or the reading habits of the first study's respondents might have changed. In other
words, the longer the time between studies the less reliable the conclusion that respondents in
the first study misrepresented their reading habits.
Secondly, the argument fails to account for the possibility that the respondents in the first
study constitute a different population than public library patrons. Admittedly, both groups are
comprised of Leeville citizens. However, it is entirely possible that more highly educated
citizens who frequent the University library rather than public libraries, or who purchase books
rather than borrow them, are the ones who responded to the first study.
Thirdly, the argument fails to account for the possibility that literary classics, the book type
that the first study's respondents indicated they preferred, are not readily available at
LeeviUe's public libraries---or at least not as readily available as mystery novels. Experience
informs me that this is likely, because mystery novels are in greater supply and are cheaper for
libraries to acquire than literary classics. If this is the case, it provides an alternative
explanation for the fact that more mystery novels than literary classics are checked out from
Leeville's public libraries.
Finally, the reliability of the first study rests on its statistical integrity. The argument fails to
indicate what portion of the people surveyed actually responded; the smaller this portion, the
less reliable the results. Nor does the argument indicate how many people were surveyed, or
whether the sample was representative of Leeville's general population. Again, the smaller the
sample, the less reliable the results.
In conclusion, the assertion that respondents in the first study misrepresented their reading
habits is untenable, in light of a variety of alternative explanations for the apparent discrepancy
between the two studies. To strengthen the argument, its proponent must show that the
respondents in the first study are representative of Leeville citizens generally, and that both
groups are equally likely to check out books from Leeville's public libraries. To better evaluate
the argument, we would need to know the length of time between the two studies, and whether
any significant demographic changes occurred during this time. We would also need to know
the availability of literary classics compared to mystery novels at Leeville's public libraries.























Argument 50
"A recent study shows that people living on the continent of North America suffer 9 times more
chronic fatigue and 31 times more chronic depression than do people living on the continent of
Asia. Interestingly, Asians, on average, eat 20 grams of soy per day, whereas North Americans
eat virtually none. It turns out that soy contains phytochemicals called isoflavones, which have
been found to possess disease-preventing properties. Thus, North Americans should consider
eating soy on a regular basis as a way of preventing fatigue and depression."
This argument condudes that North Americans should eat soy on a regular basis as a
means of preventing fatigue and depression. The argument cites a recent study showing that
North Americans suffer far greater from these problems than people in Asia do, that Asians eat
soy regularly whereas North Americans do not, and that soy is known to possess
disease-preventing properties. The argument relies on several doubtful assumptions, and is
therefore unconvincing.
First, the argument assumes that depression and fatigue are just as readily diagnosed in
Asia as in North America. However, it is entirely possible that Asians suffering from these
problems do not complain about them or otherwise admit them. For that matter, perhaps Asian
medical doctors view certain symptoms which North Americans would consider signs of
fatigue and depression as signs of some other problem.
Secondly, the argument assumes that the difference in soy consumption is the only possible
explanation for this disparity in the occurrence of fatigue and depression. Yet the argument
fails to substantiate this assumption. Common sense informs me that any one of a myriad of
other differences---environmental, dietary, and genetic--might explain why North Americans
suffer from these problems to a greater extent than Asians do. Without considering and ruling
out alternative reasons for this disparity, the argument's conclusion that soy is the key to the
disparity is indefensible.
Thirdly, the argument unfairly infers from the fact that soy is known to possess disease
preventing properties that these properties help prevent fatigue and depression specifically.
The argument supplies no evidence to substantiate this assumption. Moreover, whether
fatigue and depression are appropriately classified as diseases in the first place is
questionable.
Finally, even if the properties in soy can be shown to prevent fatigue and depression, the
argument unfairly assumes that eating soy is the only means of ingesting the key substances.
It is entirely possible that these same properties are found in other forms, and therefore that
North Americans need not increase soy consumption to help prevent fatigue and depression.
In sum, the argument is dubious at best. Before I can accept its conclusion, the argument's
proponent must provide better evidence that people in Asia in fact suffer less from fatigue and
depression than North Americans do. To better evaluate the argument I would need to know
what kinds of diseases the properties of soy are known to help prevent, and whether they
relate at all to fatigue and depression. I would also need to know what other foods contain the
same properties as soy--to determine what alternatives, if any, are available for preventing
fatigue and depression.























Argument 51
The following is taken from the editorial section of the local newspaper in Rockingham.
"In order to save a considerable amount of money, Rockingham's century-old town hall should
be torn down and replaced by the larger and more energy-efficient building that some citizens
have proposed. The old town hall is too small to comfortably accommodate the number of
people who are employed by the town. In addition, it is very costly to heat the old hall in winter
and cool it in summer. The new, larger building would be more energy efficient, costing less
per square foot to heat and cool than the old hall. Furthermore, it would be possible to rent out
some of the space in the new building, thereby generating income for the town of
Rockingham."
This editorial condudes that the town of Rockingham would save money by replacing its old
town hall with a larger, more energy-efficient one. To support the argument the editorial's
author cites the need for a larger building to comfortably accommodate employees, and the
fact that the proposed building would cost less per cubic foot to heat and cool than the current
building would. However, the editorial is unconvincing for several reasons.
First of all, even though it would cost less per cubic foot to heat and cool the new building,
because the new building would be larger the total cooling and heating costs might actually be
greater than they are now. Add to this possibility the initial cost of replacing the structure, and
in all likelihood the new building would not save money for the town. Besides, the argument
ignores other, potentially less expensive, means of reducing current heating and cooling
costs--for example, retrofitting the building with a new climate control system.
Secondly, the editorial relies partly on the fact that the current building cannot comfortably
accommodate all the people who work in it. However, this fact in itself is irrelevant to whether
the town would save money by replacing the building. Besides, the editorial ignores other,
potentially less expensive, solutions to the current comfort problem--for example, adding an
annex to the current structure.
Thirdly, the editorial relies partly on the assertion that the town could generate income by
renting out part of a larger new building. However, the author equivocates here--on the one
hand claiming that a larger building is needed because the old one is too small to
accommodate employees, while on the other hand proposing that the additional space not be
used to solve this problem. The use of conflicting evidence to support the same conclusion
renders the argument wholly unpersuasive.
In conclusion, the editorial is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the assertion that a
new building would save the town money, the editorial's author must provide a detailed
analysis comparing the cost of cooling and heating the current hall to the anticipated cost of
cooling and heating the new hall. In this analysis, the author must factor in the initial cost of
replacing the old hall, as well as the additional rental income that the larger hall might generate.
Finally, the author must choose between two competing objectives: creating a more spacious
environment for current employees or creating a larger hall for the purpose of generating rental
income.























Argument 52
"Claitown University needs both affordable housing for its students and a way to fund the
building of such housing. The best solution to this problem is to commission a famous architect
known for experimental and futuristic buildings. It is common knowledge that tourists are
willing to pay money to tour some of the architect's buildings, so it can be expected that
tourists will want to visit this new building. The income from the fees charged to tourists will
soon cover the building costs. Furthermore, such a building will attract new students as well as
donations from alumni. And even though such a building will be much larger than our current
need for student housing, part of the building can be used as office space."
This argument recommends commissioning a famous architect known for futuristic and
experimental designs as the best means of providing new affordable housing for Claitown
University students. The argument's line of reasoning is that the building will attract paying
tourists, new students, and donations from alumni all of which will help raise the funds
needed for the project. However, the argument is problematic in several critical respects.
First of all, a famous architect might charge a substantial fee for the project, in which case
the funds raised by charging tourists and through alumni donations might be offset to the point
of rendering the entire project unfeasible financially. The argument's proponent must address
this issue before I can accept the argument's conclusion.
Secondly, the argument relies on the tenuous assumption that tourists will be interested in
paying for tours of a building used for a purpose as mundane as student housing. It is entirely
possible that once the building is in use, tourists will not be willing to pay for tours. Besides,
perhaps the appeal of this architect's buildings lies primarily in their exteriors, in which case
tourists would be able to appreciate the new building's salient architectural features without
paying for a tour. In either case, the argument's claim that the architect's notoriety and the
building itself will generate the funds needed for its construction would be dubious at best.
Thirdly, the argument fails to explain how the University will be able to pay for construction
when it will not begin to receive the revenue it needs until after construction is complete.
Unless the architect and contractors agree to be paid later, the argument's proponent cannot
convince me that the recommended course of action will achieve the University's goals.
Finally, the argument assumes without justification that a futuristic or experimental building
will attract alumni donations and students. While this might be true, it is also possible that
instead the University's alumni and students stronger prefer the architectural status quo at
their campus; in fact, the appeal of the campus' predominant architectural styles might be one
of the key attractions for students and alumni dollars. Thus I would need some evidence to
substantiate this assumption before I can accept the argument's conclusion.
In sum, as it stands the argument is not well supported. To strengthen it, the argument's
proponent must supply dear evidence--perhaps involving other college buildings designed by
famous architects--that tourists will be willing to pay for tours of the building once it is
completed and is in use as student housing. To better assess the argument I would need
detailed and realistic financial projections, accounting for the architect's fees, to determine the
project's financial feasibility. I would also need to know--perhaps by way of a reliable
survey--the extent to which students and alumni would be likely to support the project.























Argument 53
The following appeared in a business magazine.
"As a result of numerous consumer complaints of dizziness and nausea, Promofoods
requested that eight million cans of tuna be returned for testing last year. Promofoods
concluded that the cans did not, after all, contain chemicals that posed a health risk. This
conclusion is based on the fact that the chemists from Promofoods tested samples of the
recalled cans and found that, of the eight chemicals most commonly blamed for causing
symptoms of dizziness and nausea, five were not found in any of the tested cans. The
chemists did find that the three remaining suspected chemicals are naturally found in all other
kinds of canned foods."
This magazine article concludes that the 8 million cans of tuna Promofoods recalled, due to
complaints about nausea and dizziness, do not after ail contain any chemicals that pose a
health risk. To support this conclusion the author cites the fact that five of eight chemicals
commonly causing these symptoms were not found in the recalled cans, while the other three
also occur naturally in other canned foods. For several reasons, this evidence lends little
credible support to the author's conclusion.
To begin with, the author relies partly on the fact that, although three of the eight chemicals
most commonly blamed for nausea and dizziness appeared in Promofoods' recalled tuna,
these chemicals also occur naturally in other canned foods. However, this fact alone lends no
support to the author's conclusion, for two reasons. First, the author might be ignoring an
important distinction between "naturally occurring" chemicals and those not occurring naturally.
It is entirely possible that these three chemicals do not occur naturally in Promofoods' tuna,
and that it is for this reason that the chemicals cause nausea and dizziness. Secondly, it is
entirely possible that even when they occur naturally these chemicals cause the same
symptoms. Unless the author rules out both possibilities, he cannot reliably conclude that the
recalled tuna would not cause these symptoms.
Another problem with the argument is that the author's conclusion is too broad. Based on
evidence about certain chemicals that might cause two particular heath-related symptoms, the
author concludes that the recalled tuna contains no chemicals that pose a health risk. However,
the author fails to account for the myriad of other possible health risks that the recalled tuna
might potentially pose. Without ruling out all other such risks, the author cannot justifiably
reach his conclusion.
A third problem with the argument involves that fact that the eight particular chemicals with
which the test was concerned are only the eight "most commonly blamed" for nausea and
dizziness. It is entirely possibly that other chemicals might also cause these symptoms, and
that one or more of these other chemicals actually caused the symptoms. Without ruling out
this possibility, the author cannot jusufiably conclude that the recalled tuna would not cause
nausea and dizziness.
A final problem with the argument involves thetesting procedure itself. The author provides
no information about the number of recaUed cans tested or the selection method used. Unless
the number of cans is a sufficiently large sample and is statistically repre sentative of all the
recalled cans, the study's results are not statistically reliable.
In conclusion, the article is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the assertion that the
recalled tuna would not cause nausea and dizziness, the author must provide evidence that
the three chemicals mentioned that occur naturally in other canned foods also appear naturally
in Promofoods' tuna. The author must also provide evidence that ingesting other canned foods
containing these three chemicals does not cause these symptoms. To better evaluate the
argument, we would need to know whether the sample used in the tests was statistically
significant and representative of all the recalled tuna. We would also need to know what other
chemicals in the recalled tuna might pose any health risk at all.























Argument 54
The following appeared in a local newspaper.
"People should not be misled by the advertising competition between Coldex and Cold-Away,
both popular over-the-counter cold medications that anyone can purchase without a doctor's
prescription. Each brand is accusing the other of causing some well-known, unwanted side
effect: Coldex is known to contribute to existing high blood pressure and Cold-Away is known
to cause drowsiness. But the choice should be clear for most health-conscious people:
Cold-Away has been on the market for much longer and is used by more hospitals than is
Coldex. Clearly, Cold-Away is more effective."
This argument concludes that Cold-Away is a more effective non-prescription cold
medication than Coldex. The argument points out that each one has a distinct unwanted side
effect: Cold-Away causes drowsiness, while Coldex contributes to existing high blood pressure.
To support its conclusion, the argument points out that Cold-Away has been on the market
considerably longer, and that it is used by more hospitals than Coldex. I find the argument
unconvincing for three reasons.
First, the mere fact that Cold-Away has been on the market longer than Coldex is scant
evidence of their comparative effectiveness. Well-established products are not necessarily
better than newer ones. Moreover, in my observation newer medicines often make use of
newer pharmaceutical developments than competing products; thus it can be argued that
since Cold-Away has been on the market longer than Coldex it is likely to be less, not more,
effective than Coldex.
Secondly, the argument unfairly assumes that hospitals prefer Cold-Away because of its
comparative effectiveness as a cold medication. It is entirely possible that hospitals do not
consider drowsiness an undesirable side effect for their patients. For that matter, perhaps
hospitals use Cold-Away primarily for this effect rather than as a cold medication.
A third problem with the argument involves Coldex's side effect: high blood pressure.
Admittedly, people who already have a serious blood pressure problem would probably be well
advised to use Cold-Away instead. However, only those people are susceptible to this side
effect. Thus for all other people the vast majority of cold-medicine users--Coldex's side effect
is irrelevant in choosing between the two products. Moreover, if a person without high blood
pressure wishes to avoid drowsiness, Coldex would seem to be the preferable medication.
In sum, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it, the argument's
proponent must provide dear evidence that hospitals prefer Cold-Away because of its
effectiveness in treating colds. To better assess the argument, I would need better evidence
comparing the effectiveness of the two products--perhaps through clinical studies or reliable
surveys of the general population.























Argument 55
"A folk remedy* for insomnia, the scent in lavender flowers, has now been proved effective. In a
recent study, 30 volunteers with chronic insomnia slept each night for three weeks on
lavender-scented pillows in a controlled room where their sleep was monitored. During the first
week, volunteers continued to take their usual sleeping medication. They slept soundly but
wakened feeling tired. During the second week, the volunteers discontinued their medication.
As a result, they slept less soundly than the previous week and felt even more tired. During the
third week, the volunteers slept longer and more soundly than in the previous two weeks. This
shows that over a short period of time lavender cures insomnia."
*A folk remedy is usually a plant-based form of treatment common to traditional forms of
medicine, ones that developed before the advent of modern medical services and technology.
The speaker concludes that the scent of lavender provides an effective short-term cure for
insomnia. To support this conclusion the speaker cites a three-week experiment in which
researchers monitored the apparent effects of lavender on 30 insomniacs, who slept on
lavender-scented pillows each night of the experiment. The speaker's account of the
experiment reveals several critical problems with it. Together, these problems serve to
undermine the speaker's argument.
A threshold problem involves the definition of insomnia. The speaker fails to define this
critical term. Ifinsomnia is defined as an inability to fall asleep, then how soundly or long a
person sleeps, or how fired a person feels after sleep, is irrelevant to whether the person
suffers from insomnia. In short, without a dear definition of insomnia it is impossible to assess
the strength of the argument.
Another fundamental problem is that the speaker omits to inform us about the test subjects'
sleep patterns just prior to the experiment. It is impossible to conclude with any confidence that
the subjects benefited from sleeping on lavender-scented pillows without comparing how they
slept with the pillows to how they sleep without them.
Yet another problem involves the fact that subjects slept more soundly and awakened less
fired the first week than the second, and that they used their regular sleep medication the first
week but not the second. This evidence tends to show only that the subjects' other sleep
medications were effective; it proves nothing about the effectiveness of lavender.
A fourth problem involves the speaker's account of the experiment's third week, during
which the speaker reports only that the subjects slept longer and more soundly than in the
previous two weeks. We are not informed whether the subjects took any medication during the
third week. Assuming they did not, any one of a variety of factors other than the
lavender-scented pillows might explain the third week's results. Perhaps the subjects were
simply making up for sleep they lost the previous week
medication. Or perhaps the subjects when they discontinued their regular were finally becoming accustomed to the
lavender-scented pillows, which actually disturbed sleep initially. In short, without ruling out
other explanations for the third week's results, the speaker cannot confidently identify what
caused the subjects to sleep longer and more soundly that week.
Two final problems with the argument involve the experimental process. The experiment's
results are reliable only if all other factors that might affect sleep patterns remained constant
during the three-week period, and if the number of experimental subjects is statistically
significant. Without evidence of the experiment's methodological and statistical reliability, the
speaker's conclusion is unjustifiable.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the assertion that
lavender-scented pillows provide a short-term cure for insomnia, the author must provide
evidence that the test subjects' insomnia was worse just prior to the experiment than at the
conclusion of the experiment, and that the number of subjects is statistically sufficient to
warrant the conclusion. To better assess the argument, we would need a clear definition of
insomnia, as well as more information about whether the researchers conducted the
experiment in a controlled environment.























Argument 56
"Typically, as people age, their bone mass decreases, making them more vulnerable to bone
fractures. A recent study concludes that the most effective way to reduce the risk of fractures in
later life is to take twice the recommended dose of vitamin D and calcium daily. The three-year
study followed a group of French women in their eighties who were nursing-home residents.
The women were given daily supplements of twice the recommended dose of vitamin D and
calcium. In addition, the women participated in a light weightlifting program. After three years,
these women showed a much lower rate of hip fractures than is average for their age."
This argument concludes that elderly people should take twice the recommended dosage of
vitamin D and calcium in order to minimize loss of bone mass, and therefore the risk of bone
fractures. To support this conclusion the argument's proponent cites a 3-year study involving a
group of French female nursing-home residents in their eighties. After three years of weight
training, along with taking the indicated dosages of vitamin D and calcium, these women as a
group were observed to suffer far fewer hip fractures than is average for their age. This
argument suffers from several critical flaws and is therefore unconvincing.
First and foremost, the argument assumes unfairly that the additional vitamin D and calcium,
rather than the weight training, were responsible for the lower-than-average incidence of hip
fractures among this group of women. It is entirely possible that the weight training, not the
supplements, was responsible for preserving bone mass. Also, weight training is known to
improve muscular strength, coordination, and flexibility, which in turn might reduce the
likelihood of accidental falls and other injuries. Thus the weight training could also have been
responsible in this respect.
The argument also overlooks many other possible explanations for the comparatively low
incidence of hip fractures among this group of women. For example, perhaps these women
were more physically fit than average to begin with. Or perhaps the nursing homes where the
group resided provided special safeguards against accidental injuries that are not ordinarily
available for most elderly people. Or perhaps French people are less susceptible to bone loss
than other people are--due perhaps to cultural dietary habits or genetic predisposition. For that
matter, perhaps women are genetically less disposed to lose bone mass than men are. Any of
these scenarios, if true, would undermine the conclusion that the lower incidence of hip
fractures was attributable to the additional vitamin D and calcium.
Finally, even ifwe accept that taking twice the recommended dosages of vitamin D and
calcium significantly reduces the risk of bone fractures for older people, the argument ignores
the possibility that some other dosage--perhaps three times the recommended dosage--would
reduce the risk of bone fractures even more. Without ruling out this possibility, the argument's
proponent cannot justifiably conclude that twice the recommended dosage provides the
optimal reduction of risk.
In sum, this is a weak argument. To strengthen it, the argument's proponent must consider
and eliminate all other possible explanations for the comparatively low incidence of hip
fractures among this group of women. The proponent must also provide evidence that this
group of women are representative of older people generally in ways that might affect the
incidence of hip fractures---aside from their vitamin D and calcium intake. To better assess the
argument, I would need more information about other means of preventing bone loss in older
adults, and whether such other means are more or less effective than taking twice the
recommended dosage of vitamin D and calcium.























Argument 57
The following appeared in a letter from a department chairperson to the president of Pierce University.
"Some studies conducted by Bronston College, which is also located in a small town, reveal
that both male and female professors are happier living in small towns when their spouses are
also employed in the same geographic area. Therefore, in the interest of attracting the most
gifted teachers and researchers to our faculty and improving the morale of our entire staff, we
at Pierce University should offer employment to the spouse of each new faculty member we
hire. Although we cannot expect all offers to be accepted or to be viewed as an ideal job offer,
the money invested in this effort will clearly be well spent because, if their spouses have a
chance of employment, new professors will be more likely to accept our offers."
In this letter, a depaxiax,ent chairperson at Pierce University recommends that Pierce offer
jobs to spouses of new faculty in order to attract the most gifted teachers and researchers. To
support this recommendation, the chairperson cites certain Bronston University studies, which
concluded that in small towns male as well as female faculty are happier when their spouses
are employed in the same geographic area. However, the chairperson's argument relies on
certain unsubstantiated assumptions about the similarity between Pierce faculty and the
faculty involved in the Bronston study, and about how the most gifted teachers and
researchers choose among jobs in the first place.
A threshold problem with the argument involves the Bronston studies themselves. The letter
provides no information about the faculty in the study--specifically, whether they were
representative of college faculty in general, and of potential Pierce faculty in particular. For
example, if the study involved only Bronston faculty, then it would be less reliable than if it
involved Pierce faculty as well. In any case, the smaller and more biased the survey's sample,
the less reliable it is for the purpose of drawing any conclusions about how Pierce might attract
new faculty.
Secondly, the argument relies on the assumption that faculty whose spouses work for the
same employer are just as happy as faculty whose spouses work for other employers.
However, since the letter fails to substantiate this assumption it is entirely possible that the
spouses involved in the Bronston study and who worked in the same geographic area attribute
their happiness to the fact that they work for different employers. If so, then the chairperson's
recommendation that Pierce try to entice gifted teachers and researchers by offering jobs to
their spouses as well would seem ill-advised.
Thirdly, the argument assumes that jobs for faculty spouses at Pierce would contribute to the
happiness of Pierce faculty to at least as great an extent as the jobs in the geographical areas
where the study's subjects resided. However, the letter provides no evidence to substantiate
this assumption. Thus it is entirely possible that jobs in the areas where the study's faculty
resided are higher-paying, offer better benefits, or otherwise contribute to the happiness of
employees' spouses--college faculty--more so than a typical staff posi tion at Pierce. In fact,
the letter suggests that this might be the case. By admitting that Pierce job offers are not ideal,
the letter implies that faculty candidates and their spouses might find a more attractive
dual-employment package elsewhere.
Finally, the argument assumes that gifted teachers and researchers consider employment
for spouses a key factor in choosing among job offers. However, the letter provides no
evidence that this is the case. In fact, it is entirely possible that the faculty in the Bronston
study are not exceptional teachers and researchers and therefore do not have as many job
options as the kind of faculty Pierce hopes to attract. If this is the case, Pierce cannot justifiably
expect the most exceptional teachers to accept positions at Pierce just because Pierce
provides employment to faculty spouses.
In conclusion, the letter is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
chairperson must show that jobs for spouses of faculty involved in the Bronston study are no
more attractive than non-faculty jobs at Pierce. The chairperson must also provide clear
evidence that the most gifted teachers and researchers find the sort of benefit that this letter
proposes to be significantly attractive in choosing among job offers. Finally, to better assess
the argument we would need more information about the faculty involved in the Bronston
studies, so that we can determine the study's relevance to Pierce, as well as its statistical
reliability.























Argument 58
"For the past five years, consumers in California have been willing to pay twice as much for
oysters from the northeastern Atlantic Coast as for Gulf Coast oysters. This trend began
shortly after harmful bacteria were found in a few raw Gulf Coast oysters. But scientists have
now devised a process for killing the bacteria. Once consumers are made aware of the
increased safety of Gulf Coast oysters, they are likely to be willing to pay as much for Gulf
Coast as for northeastern Atlantic Coast oysters, and greater profits for Gulf Coast oyster
producers will follow."
This argument points out that, ever since harmful bacteria were found in a few Gulf Coast
oysters five years ago, California consumers have been willing to pay twice as much for
northeastern Atlantic oysters as for Gulf oysters. The argument then notes that scientists have
now developed a process for killing these bacteria. The argument concludes that once
consumers become aware of this fact they will be willing to pay as much for these oysters as
for Atlantic oysters, and that profits for Gulf oyster producers will thereby increase. The
argument is flawed in three critical respects.
First, the argument assumes that the bacteria discovery is the reason for California
consumers' unwillingness to pay as much for Gulf shrimp during the past five years. However,
this is not necessarily so. Perhaps regional culinary tastes shifted during the last five years,
and perhaps Atlantic oysters have a distinct taste, texture, size, or other quality that has made
them more popular among California consumers. Since the argument fails to rule out this and
other alternative explanations for the willingness of California consumers to pay more for
Atlantic oysters, the argument's conclusion is unwarranted.
Secondly, the argument assumes too hastily that consumer awareness of the process that
kills the bacteria will necessarily result in the behavior that the argument predicts. Perhaps
after five years of favoring Atlantic oysters, consumer oyster tastes and habits have become so
well entrenched that consumers will continue to favor Atlantic oysters and will happily pay a
premium for them. Moreover, in my observation consumers often act unpredictably and
irrationally, and therefore any prediction about consumer preferences is dubious at best.
Besides, it is entirely possible that Gulf oyster producers will be unwilling to employ the new
bacteria-killing process; if so, and if consumers are aware of this fact, then in all likelihood
consumers will continue to favor Atlantic oysters.
Thirdly, even if consumers begin paying as much for Gulf oysters once they become aware of
the bacteria-killing process, the argument's conclusion that Gulf oyster producers will enjoy
increased profits as a result is unwarranted. Profit is a factor of not only revenue but also costs.
It is entirely possible that the costs of employing this new process for killing bacteria, or other
costs associated with producing Gulf oysters, will offset additional revenue. Besides, a myriad
of other possible occurrences, such as unfavorable regional weather or economic conditions,
might prevent the Gulf oyster producers from being as profitable in the foreseeable future as
the argument predicts.
In sum, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen it the argument's
proponent must consider and rule out all other possible explanations for the willingness of
California consumers to pay a premium for Atlantic oysters, and must convince me that with
consumer awareness of the bacteria-killing process Gulf oysters will become just as desirable
as Atlantic oysters. To better assess the argument's claim that profits for Gulf oyster producers
will increase as an end result, I would need to know whether Gulf oyster producers will incur
the expenses involved in killing the bacteria and, if so, the extent to which these expenses will
impinge on the producers' profits.























Argument 59
The following appeared in a memo from the marketing director of "Bargain Brand" Cereals.
"One year ago we introduced our first product, "Bargain Brand" breakfast cereal. Our very low
prices quickly drew many customers away from the top-selling cereal companies. Although the
companies producing the top brands have since tried to compete with us by lowering their
prices, and although several plan to introduce their own budget brands, not once have we
needed to raise our prices to continue making a profit. Given our success selling cereal,
Bargain Brand should now expand its business and begin marketing other low-priced food
products as quickly as possible."
In this memo the marketing director of Bargain Brand Cereal claims that the company will
continue to make a profit from sales of its cereal, and therefore that the company should
expand its bargain-priced product line to include other foods as well. To support these
assertions, the memo points out that Bargain Brand is still earning a profit from its cereal sales,
despite the fact that major competitors have lowered their cereal prices and plan to offer
bargain-priced cereal brands. On several grounds, this evidence lends little credible support
for the memo's condusions.
First of all, the mere fact that Bargain Brand is still earning a profit from its cereal sales is not
the key in determining whether its competitors are succeeding. The key instead is the extent to
which Bargain Brand profits have diminished since other companies lowered their cereal
prices. It is entirely possible that Bargain Brand has been less profitable since its competitors
lowered their cereal prices, and that given a little more time these competitors will draw
enough additional sales away from Bargain Brand to render it unprofitable. The fact that the
other companies offer the "top brands" is strong evidence that these companies can survive a
prolonged price war and ultimately prevail over Bargain Brand.
Secondly, the memo states that several major competitors plan to offer their own special
bargain brands to compete directly with Bargain Brand. Yet the memo fails to account for this
fact m concluding that Bargain Brand WIU continue to be profitable. In all likelihood, after the
introduction of competing brands Bargain Brand's profits will diminish even further. Without
providing evidence that this will not occur, the director cannot convincingly conclude that
Bargain Brand will continue to profit from its cereal sales.
Thirdly, based on the fact that Bargain Brand continues to profit from cereal sales, the memo
concludes that Bargain Brand should expand its product line to include other food products.
Yet the memo provides no evidence that Bargain Brand is likely to be profitable in other
markets. Common sense suggests the contrary--that Bargain Brand is unlikely to succeed in
markets in which it has no previous experience or exposure. Without providing evidence as to
how Bargain Brand would overcome natural barriers to entry into other markets, the director's
conclusion is weak at best.
In conclusion, the memo is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
director must show that Bargain Brand will continue to profit from cereal sales even after its
major competitors introduce their own bargain brands. To better assess the director's
conclusion that Bargain Brand should expand its line of bargain-priced foods, we would need
more information about the extent of competition and other barriers to entry in those other
markets.























Argument 60
"The Mozart School of Music should obviously be the first choice of any music student aware of
its reputation. First of all, the Mozart School stresses intensive practice and training, so that
students typically begin their training at a very young age. Second, the school has ample
facilities and up-to-date professional equipment, and its faculty includes some of the most
distinguished music teachers in the world. Finally, many Mozart graduates have gone on to be
the best known and most highly paid musicians in the nation."
This argument concludes that the Mozart School should be the first choice of any music
student aware of its reputation for (1) its intensive practice requirements for students of all
ages, (2) its outstanding facilities, up-to-date equipment, and distinguished faculty, and (3) the
accomplishments of its graduates. Although the evidence provided strongly suggests that this
school would be an excellent choice for certain prospective students, the conclusion that it
should be the first choice for any prospective music student is indefensible in three respects.
First, the fact that the Mozart School is known for its intensive practice and training regimen
for even the youngest students suggests that the school might be suitable for certain child
proteges, but perhaps not for children for whom a more balanced education would be more
prudent. For that matter, many older students with other interests and activities would no doubt
find the intensity and time commitment that the Mozart program requires unfeasible or
undesirable.
Secondly, in all likelihood the outstanding facilities, equipment, and faculty come at a
considerable price to students--m the form of high tuition. Thus the argument seems to
assume that for all prospective music students money is no object when it comes to musical
training. Yet common sense informs me that many students would place a higher priority on
affordable training than on the specific features that the argument touts.
Thirdly, although the fact that many famous performers and highly-paid performers are
among the school's graduates might be relevant to students with the requisite natural talent
and motivation to attain these lofty goals, for others this feature would not be relevant. For
example, some prospective students would no doubt wish to focus their study on musicology,
theory, composition, or even performance--not to become famous or highly-paid performers
but rather to prepare for careers in music education. Other prospective students might not
aspire to make music their eventual vocation at all. Thus some other school--one with a less
rigorous performance-oriented approach--might be a better choice for less-gifted students and
for those with other aspirations.
In sum, the Mozart School's features do not justify the argument's sweeping conclusion that
the school should be the first choice for every music student. To strengthen the argument, its
proponent must show at the very least that the school would be affordable to any prospective
student. To better assess the argument I would need more information about what
non-performance music programs the school offers, and whether Mozart students of various
ages have any choice in how intensely they are required to practice and train.























Argument 61
The following is a memorandum issued by the publisher of a newsmagazine, Newsbeat, in the country of Dinn.
"Our poorest-selling magazine issues over the past three years were those that featured
international news stories on their front covers. Over the same period, competing
news-magazines have significantly decreased the number of cover stories that they devote to
international news. Moreover, the cost of maintaining our foreign bureaus to report on
international news is increasing. Therefore, we should decrease our emphasis on international
news and refrain from displaying such stories on our magazine covers."
In this memo the publisher of the magazine Ne~vsbeat claims that to maximize sales the
magazine should decrease its emphasis on international news and refrain from displaying
such stories on its covers. To support this condusion the publisher points out that the
magazine's poorest-seUing issues during the last three years have been those with cover
stories about international events, and that during this same period the number of international
cover stories appearing in other news magazines has decreased. On several grounds, this
evidence lends little credible support for the memo's conclusion.
First of ail, the fact that the magazine's poorest-selling issues were the ones with
international cover stories might be explained by a variety of factors. Perhaps international
events themselves were not as interesting during those periods. If so, it might be a mistake to
refrain from emphasizing international events when those events are interesting enough to
stimulate sales. Or perhaps the news magazine business is seasonal, or cyclical, and those
particular issues would have sold more poorly regardless of the cover story. In short, without
ruling out other possible explanations for the relatively poor sales of those particular issues the
publisher cannot justifiably condude that international cover stories were the cause of the
relatively poor sales.
Secondly, the memo fails to indicate whether other magazines experienced an increase or a
decrease in sales by reducing their emphasis on international news. It is possible, for instance,
that the other magazines experienced declining sales even for issues focusing only on
domestic news. If so, then the publisher's recommendation would make little sense. On the
other hand, if other magazines experienced the same correlation between cover story and
sales volume, this fact would lend considerable support to the publisher's conclusion that
international cover stories were responsible for poor sales.
Thirdly, the memo cites increasing costs of maintaining international news bureaus as an
additional reason to de-emphasize international news. While this fact does lend support to the
publisher's suggestion, the publisher overlooks the possibility that if other news magazines
de-emphasize international coverage due to increasing bureau costs, NeuJsbeat might turn
out to be the only magazine covering international news, which in turn might actually stimulate
sales. It would be hasty to implement the publisher's suggestion without acknowledging and
exploring this possible scenario.
In conclusion, the memo is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen the argument, the
publisher must show that it was the international covers of Ne~vsbeat, and not some other
factor, that were responsible for the relatively poor sales of issues with those covers. To better
assess the publisher's recommendation that Nev.,sbeat should de-emphasize international
news, we would need to know what changes in sales volume other news magazines
experienced by de-emphasizing international news. We would also need more information
about the impact that increasing bureau costs will have on magazines presently competing
with Newsbeat in the area of international news.























Argument 62
The following recommendation was made by the president and administrative staff of Grove College, a private institution, to the college's governing committee.
"We recommend that Grove College preserve its century-old tradition of all-female education
rather than admit men into its programs. It is true that a majority of faculty members voted in
favor of coeducation, arguing that it would encourage more students to apply to Grove. But
eighty percent of the students responding to a survey conducted by the student government
wanted the school to remain all female, and over half of the alumni who answered a separate
survey also opposed coeducation. Keeping the college all-female, therefore, will improve
morale among students and convince alumni to keep supporting the college financially."
In this memo Grove College's administration recommends preserving its tradition of
admitting only female students. The administration admits that most faculty members are in
favor of a co-educational policy as a means of encouraging more students to apply to Grove.
But the administration defends its recommendation by citing a student government survey in
which 80% of student respondents and more than 50% of alumni respondents reported that
they favor the status quo. The administration reasons that preserving the status quo would
improve student morale and help ensure continued alumni donations to Grove. This argument
is flawed in several critical respects.
First, the memo provides no evidence that the results of either of the two surveys are
statistically reliable. For example, suppose newer students tend to be content with the all
female policy while students who have attended Grove for a longer time would prefer a
co-educational policy. If a disproportionate number of the survey's respondents were newer
students, then the survey results would distort the student body's opinion as a group. With
respect to the alumni survey, perhaps fewer alumni who donate substantial sums to Grove
responded to the survey than other alumni did. If so, then the survey results would distort the
comparison between the total amount of future donations under the two scenarios. Besides,
the memo provides no information about what percentage of Grove's students and alumni
responded to the surveys; the lower the percentages, the less reliable the results of the
surveys.
Secondly, the administration hastily assumes that Grove's alumni as a group would be less
inclined to donate money merely if Grove begins admitting male students. This aspect of
Grove's admission policy is only one of many factors that might affect alumni donations. For
example, since Grove's faculty are generally in favor of changing the policy, perhaps the
change would improve faculty morale and therefore the quality of instruction, in mm having a
positive impact on alumni donations. And, if the particular alumni who are in a position to make
the largest contributions recognize faculty morale as important, an increase in donations by
these individuals might very well offset a dedine in smaller donations by other alumni.
Finally, the administration's argument that student morale would improve under the status
quo is logically unsound in two respects. First, the administration provides no reason why
morale would improve, as opposed to remaining at its current level, if the status quo is simply
maintained. Second, the administration cannot logically determine how the morale of the
student body would be affected under a co-educational policy until it implements that policy
and takes into account the morale of the new male students along with that of all female
students.
In sum, the administration has failed to convince me that maintaining Grove's all-female
policy would be more likely to improve student morale and help ensure continued alumni
donations than moving to a co-educational policy. To better assess the argument I would need
detailed information about the two surveys to determine whether the respondents as groups
were representative of their respective populations. To bolster its recommendation the
administration must provide better evidence--perhaps by way of a reliable alumni survey that
takes into account respondents' financial status and history of donadons--that prospective
donor alumni would be strongly opposed to a co-educational policy and would be less inclined
to donate money were Grove to implement such a policy.























Argument 63
The following appeared in a letter to the school board in the town of Centerville.
"All students should be required to take the driver's education course at Centerville High
School. In the past two years several accidents in and around Centerville have involved
teenage drivers. Since a number of parents in Centerville have complained that they are too
busy to teach their teenagers to drive, some other instruction is necessary to ensure that these
teenagers are safe drivers. Although there are two driving schools in Centerville, parents on a
tight budget cannot afford to pay for driving instruction. Therefore an effective and mandatory
program sponsored by the high school is the only solution to this serious problem."
This letter recommends mandatory driver's education courses at Centerville High School.
The author bases this recommendation on three facts: during the last two years several
Centerville car accidents have involved teenage drivers; Centerville parents are too busy to
teach driving to their children; and the two private driver-education courses in the area are
expensive. As discussed below, the argument suffers from several critical flaws and is
therefore unpersuasive.
First of all, the letter fails to indicate who or what caused the car accidents to which the letter
refers. If Centerville High School students caused the accidents, and if those accidents would
have been avoided had these students enrolled in the high school's driving course, then the
argument would have merit. However, it is equally likely that the other drivers were at fault, or
that no driver was at fault. Moreover, it is entirely possible that the teenage drivers had in fact
taken the high school's driving course, or that they were not local high school students in the
first place. The author must rule out all these possibilities in order to conclude confidently that
a school-sponsored mandatory driving course would have prevented these accidents.
Secondly, whether the fact that several car accidents the last two years involved teenage
drivers suggests a need for a mandatory driving course depends partly on the comparative
accident rate during earlier years. It is entirely possible, for instance, that the rate of accidents
involving teenagers has been steadily declining, and that this decline is due to the availability
of the two private driving courses. Without ruling out this possibility, the letter's conclusion is
not defensible.
The argument is problematic in certain other respects as well. It assumes that a mandatory
school-sponsored course would be effective, yet provides no evidence to support this
assumption. Similarly, the argument fails to substantiate its assumption that a significant
percentage of Centerville's parents cannot afford private driving instruction for their teenage
children. Absent substantiating evidence for either of these necessary assumptions, I cannot
be convinced that Centerville should establish the proposed driving course.
In conclusion, the letter's author fails to adequately support the recommendation for a
school-sponsored mandatory driving course. To strengthen the argument, the author must
provide clear evidence that Centerville High School students caused the accidents in question,
and that a mandatory driving course would have prevented them. To better evaluate the
argument, I would need more information about the affordability of the two private driving
courses and about the effectiveness of a mandatory school-sponsored course compared to
that of the two private courses.























Argument 64
The following is a memorandum from the sales director to the president of the Healthy-and-Good food company.
"A recent study indicates that Venadial, a new margarine currently produced only in the
country of Alta, actually reduces cholesterol levels. Derived from the resin of pine trees,
Venadial works by activating a metabolic response that is not yet well understood. However,
cholesterol levels fell ten to fifteen percent among participants in the study who consumed
Venadial daily, and the risk of heart attack by one-third. In addition, the new margarine is so
popular that stores in Alta are unable to keep it on their shelves. Therefore, if our company
obtains the exclusive right to sell Venadial internationally, our profits are sure to increase
substantially within a very short time."
In this memo the sales director of Healthy-and-Good food company recommends obtaining
the exclusive right to sell the new margarine Venadial internationally in order to increase
company profits substantially and quickly. To support this recommendation the director points
out that, in a recent study, participants who consumed Venadial daily experienced a decrease
in their cholesterol level and in their risk of heart attack. The director also points out that in Alta,
the only country where Venadial is currently produced, this margarine is extremely popular
among consumers. This argument contains several critical flaws, which render it
unpersuasive.
First of all, the memo lacks sufficient information about how the study was conducted to
determine what conclusions, if any, can be drawn from it. Unless all other conditions potentially
affecting cholesterol level and heart-attack risk remained constant during the study, and unless
the study induded a statistically significant number of participants, any condusions from the
study are simply unreliable. Moreover, the memo fails to indicate whether the study also
included a distinct group of participants who did not consume Venadial daily. If it did, then the
comparison of cholesterol levels and heart attacks between the two groups would help us to
assess the strength of the memo's claims about the health benefits of Venadial.
Secondly, the memo unfairly assumes that since Venadial is popular in Alta it will also be
popular in other countries. Consumer tastes in foods like margarine, as well as concerns about
health matters such as cholesterol level, vary widely from country to country. It is quite possible
that consumers in Alta enjoy the taste of Venadial more than other consumers would, or that
consumers in Alta are more concemed than the average person about cholesterol level and
heart attacks. Since the memo provides no evidence that tastes and health concerns of Alta
consumers are representative of those of people generally, the sales director's conclusion that
Venadial will be popular elsewhere is unjustifiable, at least based on the memo.
Thirdly, even if VenacUal is shown condusively to carry the touted health benefits and to be
popular worldwide, Healthy-and-Good WIU not necessarily earn a substantial profit by
acquiring international rights to sell Venadial. The memo provides no information about the
costs involved in manufacturing and distributing Venadial--only that it is derived from pine-tree
resin and has been produced only in Alta. Perhaps Venadial can be de rived only from certain
pine trees located in Alta and surrounding regions. If so, then the costs of procuring Venadial
might prevent the company from earning a profit. In short, without more information about
supply, demand, and production costs, it is impossible to determine whether the company can
earn a profit from acquiring international rights to sell Venadial.
In sum, the memo's recommendation is not well supported. Before I can accept it, the sales
director must supply dearer evidence that (1) Venadial contributes to lower cholesterol level
and decreased heart-attack risk, (2) consumers outside of Alta would prefer Venadial over
alternative products, and (3) the revenue from sales of Venadial would significantly outweigh
the costs of producing and distributing the product.























Argument 65
The following is a letter that recently appeared in the Oak City Gazette, a local newspaper.
"Membership in Oak City's Civic Club---a club whose primary objective is to discuss local
issues---should continue to be restricted to people who live in Oak City. People who work-in
Oak City but who live elsewhere cannot truly understand the business and politics of the city. It
is important to restrict membership to city residents because only residents pay city taxes and
therefore only residents understand how the money could best be used to improve the city. At
any rate, restricting membership in this way is unlikely to disappoint many of the nonresidents
employed in Oak City, since neighboring Elm City's Civic Club has always had an open
membership policy, and only twenty-five nonresidents have joined Elm City's Club in the last
ten years."
This letter recommends that membership in Oak City's Civic Club, the primary objective of
which is to discuss local issues, be limited to local residents. To support this recom mendation,
the author claims that since only residents pay local taxes they are the only people who
sufficiently understand local business and political issues. The author also cites the fact that in
the last ten years very few non-residents of Oak City who work in Oak City have joined nearby
Elm City's civic club, which is open to any person. The argument suffers from two critical flaws
and is therefore unpersuasive as it stands.
To begin with, the letter fails to adequately support the claim that since only residents pay
local taxes only they truly understand local business and political issues. Even given the
dubious assumption that being a local taxpayer affords one an understanding of local business
and political issues, it is fallacious to conclude that being a local taxpayer is a necessary
condition for understanding these issues. Moreover, common sense tells me that local
business people, residents or not, would probably be more intimately involved in many such
issues than local residents who do not have business interests in the town. Having failed to
address this distinct possibility, the letter is wholly unconvincing.
In further support of the recommendation, the letter cites the fact that nearby Elm City's civic
club is open to any person, yet very few Oak City business people who are not residents have
joined Elm City's club in the last ten years. But this fact alone lends no support to the
recommendation. It is possible, for instance, that these business people have no connection
with Elm City whatsoever, or that these business people have been members of Elm City's
civic club for longer than ten years. The author must eliminate these possibilities in order to
rely justifiably on this evidence for his or her recommendation.
In conclusion, the letter's author fails to adequately support the recommendation that Oak
City civic club membership be restricted to local residents. To strengthen the argument, the
author must provide dear evidence that non-residents who work in Oak City do not understand
local issues as well as residents do. To better evaluate the argument, we would need more
information about why non-resident business people in Oak City have not joined Elm City's
civic club during the last ten years.



























Argument 66
The following appeared in the annual report from the president of the National Brush Company.
"In order to save money, we at the National Brush Company have decided to pay our
employees for each brush they produce instead of for the time they spend producing brushes.
We believe that this policy will lead to the production of more and better brushes, will allow us
to reduce our staff size, and will enable the company factories to operate for fewer
hours---resulting in savings on electricity and security costs. These changes will ensure that
the best workers keep their jobs and that the company will earn a profit in the coming year."
In this report, the president of National Brush Company (NBC) concludes that the best way
to ensure that NBC will earn a profit next year is for the company to pay its workers according
to the number of brushes they produce--rather than hourly. To support this conclusion, the
president claims that the new policy will result in the production of more and better brushes,
which in turn will allow NBC to reduce its staff size and operating hours, thereby cutting
expenses. This argument is fraught with dubious assumptions, which render it entirely
unconvincing.
First of all, the argument relies on the unsubstantiated assumption that the new policy will
motivate workers to produce brushes more quickly. Whether this is the case will depend, of
course, on the amount earned per brush and the rate at which workers can produce brushes. It
will also depend on the extent to which NBC workers are content with their current income
level. Lacking evidence that the new policy would result in the production of more brushes, the
president cannot convince me that this policy would be an effective means to ensure a profit
for NBC in the coming year.
Even if the new policy does motivate NBC workers to produce more brushes, the president's
argument depends on the additional assumption that producing brushes more quickly can be
accomplished without sacrificing quality. In fact, the president goes further by predicting an
increase in quality. Yet common sense informs me that, if the production process otherwise
remains the same, quicker production is likely to reduce quality--and in any event certainly not
increase it. And a decline in quality might serve to diminish the value of NBC's brushes in the
marketplace. Thus the ultimate result of the new policy might be to reduce NBC's revenue and,
in mm, profits.
Even assuming that as the result of the new policy NBC's current work force produces more
brushes without sacrificing quality, reducing the size of the work force and the number of
operating hours would serve to offset those production gains. Admittedly, by keeping the most
efficient employees NBC would minimize the extent of this offset. Nevertheless, the president
provides no evidence that the result would be a net gain in production. Without any such
evidence the president's argument that the new policy will help ensure profitability is highly
suspect.
In sum, the president has failed to provide adequate evidence to support his claim that the
new policy would serve to ensure a profit for NBC in the coming year. To strengthen the
argument, NBC should conduct a survey or other study to demonstrate not only its workers'
willingness to work more quickly but also their ability to maintain quality at a quicker pace. To
better assess the argument I would need detailed financial projections comparing current
payroll and other operating costs with projected costs under the new policy--in order to
determine whether NBC is likely to be more profitable under the proposed scheme.























Argument 67
The following is a memorandum written by the director of personnel to the president of the Cedar Corporation.
"It would be a mistake to rehire the Good-Taste Company to supply the food in our employee
cafeteria next year. It is the second most expensive caterer in the city. In addition, its prices
have risen in each of the last three years, and it refuses to provide meals for people on special
diets. Just last month three employees complained to me that they no longer eat in the
cafeteria because they find the experience 'unbearable.' Our company should instead hire
Discount Foods. Discount is a family-owned local company and it offers a varied menu of fish
and poultry. I recently tasted a sample lunch at one of the many companies that Discount
serves and it was delicious---an indication that hiring Discount will lead to improved employee
satisfaction."
This memo recommends that Cedar Corporation replace its current food provider,
Good-Taste, with Discount Foods. To support this recommendation, the memo's author cites
Good-Taste's increasing fees, the fact that three Cedar employees refuse to eat in the
cafeteria, and various features of Discount Foods. For several reasons, this evidence fails to
provide adequate support for the recommendation.
The memo's reliance on the fact that three Cedar employees find eating in the company
cafeteria "unbearable" presents two problems. First, the memo unfairly assumes that
Good-Taste is responsible for these complaints. It is entirely possible that other conditions in
the cafeteria are instead responsible. Second, the memo assumes that complaints by only
three Cedar employees constitutes a statistically significant number which warrants replacing
Good-Taste with another food provider. However, the memo provides no evidence that this is
the case.
Another problem with the recommendation is that it relies partly on the fact that Good Taste
has been increasing its fees and is now the second-most-expensive food provider available to
Cedar. Yet the recommendation is based on what food provider would best satisfy Cedar's
employees, not what provider would reduce Cedar's costs. In other words, this evidence is not
directly relevant to the reasons for the author's recommendation. Even if expense were a
legitimate factor, it is possible that Discount is even more expensive than Good-Taste.
Yet another problem with the recommendation is that it relies partly on the need to
accommodate employees with special dietary needs. The memo provides no evidence that
Good-Taste is any less capable than Discount of accommodating these employees. Rather,
the memo merely provides that Discount offers "a varied menu of fish and poultry." Without a
more detailed comparison between the offerings of the two compapies, it is unfair to conclude
that one would meet the needs of Cedar's employees better than the other would.
Finally, the recommendation relies partly on the fact that in one taste test the memo's author
found Discount Foods to be "delicious." In all likelihood, however, the author's tastes do not
represent the collective tastes of Cedar employees; accordingly, the author's report is patently
insufficient to demonstrate that Cedar's employees would be more satisfied with Discount than
with Good-Taste.
In conclusion, the letter's author fails to adequately support the recommendation that Cedar
replace Good-Taste with Discount. To strengthen the argument, the author must provide clear
evidence that Cedar employees are dissatisfied with Good-Taste's food, and that they would
be more satisfied with Discount's food. To better evaluate the argument, we would need more
information comparing the two companies' menus to determine which is more varied and
caters to those with special dietary needs.























Argument 68
The following is a recommendation from the personnel director to the president of Acme Publishing Company.
"Many other companies have recently stated that having their employees take the Easy Read
Speed-Reading Course has greatly improved productivity. One graduate of the course was
able to read a five-hundred-page report in only two hours; another graduate rose from an
assistant manager to vice president of the company in under a year. Obviously, the faster you
can read, the more information you can absorb in a single workday. Moreover, Easy Read
costs only $500 per employee---a small price to pay when you consider the benefits to Acme.
Included in this fee is a three-week seminar in Spruce City and a lifelong subscription to the
Easy Read newsletter. Clearly, Acme would benefit greatly by requiring all of our employees to
take the Easy Read course."
In this argument, the personnel director of Acme Publishing claims that Acme would benefit
greatly from improved employee productivity if every employee takes the 3-week Easy-Read
seminar at a cost of $500 per employee. To support this daim the director points out that many
other companies have daimed to benefit from the seminar, that one student was able to read a
long report very quickly afterwards, and that another student saw his career advance
significantly during the year after the seminar. However, close scrutiny of the evidence reveals
that it accomplishes little toward supporting the director's claim, as discussed below.
First of all, the mere fact that many other companies benefited greatly from the course does
not necessarily mean that Acme will benefit similarly from it. Perhaps the type of reading on
which the course focuses is not the type in which Acme Publishing employees often engage at
work. Moreover, since Acme is a publishing company its employees are likely to be excellent
readers already, and therefore might stand to gain far less from the course than employees of
other types of companies.
Secondly, the two individual success stories the argument cites amount to scant evidence at
best of the course's effectiveness. Moreover, the director unfairly assumes that their
accomplishments can be attributed to the course. Perhaps both individuals were outstanding
readers before taking the course, and gained nothing from it. Regarding the individual whose
career advanced after taking the course, any one of a myriad of other factors might explain
that advancement. And the individual who was able to read a long report very quickly after the
course did not necessarily absorb a great deal of the material.
Thirdly, the director assumes without warrant that the benefits of the course will outweigh its
costs. While all of Acme's employees take the 3-week course, Acme's productivity might
decline significantly. This decline, along with the substantial fee for the course, might very well
outweigh the course's benefits. Without a complete cost-benefit analysis, it is unfair to
conclude that Acme would benefit greatly should all its employees take the course.
In sum, the director's evidence does not warrant his conclusion. To support his
recommendation he must first provide evidence that employees with similar reading skills as
those that Acme employees possess have benefited significantly from the course, a survey of
other publishing companies might be useful for this purpose. To better assess the argument I
would need more information about the extent to which the course would disrupt Acme's
operations. Specific information that would be useful would include the proximity of the
seminar to Acme, the hours involved, and the percentage of Acme em ployees enrolled
simultaneously.























Argument 69
From a letter to the editor of a city newspaper.
"One recent research study has indicated that many adolescents need more sleep than they
are getting, and another study has shown that many high school students in our city are
actually dissatisfied with their own academic performance. As a way of combating these
problems, the high schools in our city should begin classes at 8:30 A.M. instead of 7:30 A.M.,
and end the school day an hour later. This arrangement will give students an extra hour of
sleep in the morning, thereby making them more alert and more productive. Consequently, the
students will perform better on tests and other assignments, and their academic skills will
improve significantly."
This letter concludes that the academic performance of local high school students would
improve if the daily school schedule were to begin and end one hour later. To support this
recommendation the letter's author cites two studies, one showing that adolescents generally
do not get enough sleep, the other showing that many local high school stu dents are
dissatisfied with their academic performance. The recommendation relies on a series of
unsubstantiated assumptions about the habits of high school students and about the studies
themselves. As a result, the letter is not convincing.
First of all, the letter's recommendation depends on the doubtful assumption that by
beginning classes one hour later students will sleep one hour longer each night. Experience
tells us, however, that this will not necessarily be the case. Just as likely, students will adjust to
the new schedule by falling asleep one hour later. Moreover, by staying up one hour later at
night students might very well engage in the sort of late-night social or even delinquent
activities that would disrupt their productivity at school.
Secondly, the letter's conclusion relies on the assumption that one additional hour of sleep
would in fact result in improved academic performance. While this might be the case, the letter
provides no evidence to substantiate this assumption. It is entirely possible that one hour of
additional sleep would not suffice. Moreover, the letter provides no evidence that the students
who are dissatisfied with their academic performance are also the ones who would benefit
from the new schedule. It is entirely possible that these particular students already sleep
longer than most other students, or that their academic performance is already optimal.
Conversely, it is entirely possible that those students whose academic performance could
stand the greatest improvement would be unmotivated to become better students regardless
of how much they sleep each night.
A final problem with the argument involves the two studies themselves. The letter pro vides
no information about how either study was conducted. Without knowing whether the sample of
adolescents studied was representative of the overall high school population in the city, it is
impossible to confidently apply the studies' results to that population. Moreover, we are not
informed about the size of the sample in either study; the smaller the sample, the less reliable
the study's conclusion.
In conclusion, this letter's recommendation for beginning and ending the high school day
one hour later is not well justified. To strengthen the argument, the author must provide clear
evidence that adjusting the schedule will in fact result in the students' sleeping longer each
night, and that this additional sleep will in fact improve their academic performance. To better
assess the author's recommendation, we would need more information about the sampling
method used in the two studies.























Argument 70
"Butter has now been replaced by margarine in Happy Pancake House restaurants throughout
the southwestern United States. Only about 2 percent of customers have complained,
indicating that 98 people out of 100 are happy with the change. Furthermore, many servers
have reported that a number of customers who still ask for butter do not complain when they
are given margarine instead. Clearly, either these customers cannot distinguish margarine
from butter, or they use the term "butter" to refer to either butter or margarine. Thus, to avoid
the expense of purchasing butter, the Happy Pancake House should extend this cost-saving
change to its restaurants in the southeast and northeast as well."
In this argument the speaker recommends that, in order to save money, Happy Pancake
House (HPH) should serve margarine instead of butter at all its restaurants. To support the
argument, the speaker points out that HPH's Southwestern restaurants now serve margarine
but not butter, and that only 2% of these restaurants' customers have complained about the
change. The speaker also cites reports from many servers that a number of customers asking
for butter have not complained when given margarine instead. This argument is unconvincing
for several reasons.
First of all, the speaker does not indicate how long these restaurants have been refusing
margarine to customers. If the change is very recent, it is possible that insufficient data have
been collected to draw any reliable conclusions. Lacking this information I cannot assess the
reliability of the evidence for the purpose of showing that HPH customers in the Southwest are
generally happy with the change.
Secondly, the speaker fails to indicate what portion of HPH customers order meals calling
for either butter or margarine. Presumably, the vast majority of meals served at any pancake
restaurant call for one or the other. Yet it is entirely possible that a significant percentage of
HPH customers do not order pancakes, or prefer fruit or another topping instead. The greater
this percentage, the less meaningful any statistic about the level of customer satisfaction
among all of HPH's Southwestern customers as an indicator of preference for butter or
margarine.
Thirdly, the speaker unfairly assumes that HPH customers unhappy with the change
generally complain about it. Perhaps many such customers express their displeasure simply
by not returning to the restaurant. The greater the percentage of such customers, the weaker
the argument's evidence as a sign of customer satisfaction with the change. Two additional
problems specifically involve the reports from "many" servers that "a number" of customers
asking for butter do not complain when served margarine instead. Since the speaker fails to
indicate the percentage of servers reporting or customers w,-ho have not complained to
servers, this evidence is far too vague to be meaningful. Also, the speaker omits any mention
of reports from servers about customers who have complained. Since the anecdotal evidence
is one-sided, it is inadequate to assess overall customer satisfaction with the change.
Finally, even if HPH's Southwest customers are happy with the change, the speaker unfairly
assumes that customers in other regions will respond similarly to it. Perhaps Southwestemers
are generally less concerned than other people about whether they eat margarine or butter. Or
perhaps Southwestemers actually prefer margarine to butter, in contrast to prevailing tastes
elsewhere. Or perhaps Southwestemers have relatively few choices when it comes to pancake
restaurants.
In sum, the speaker's argument is weak. To better assess it I would need to know: (1) how
long the change has been in effect in the Southwest, (2) what percentage of HPH servers
and managers have received customer complaints about the change, and (3) the number of
such complaints as a percentage of the total number of HPH customers who order meals
calling for either butter or margarine. To strengthen the argument, the speaker must provide
clear evidence--perhaps by way of a reliable survey--that HPH customers in other regions are
likely to be happy with the change and continue to pa tronize HPH after the change.























Argument 71
"Many employees of major United States corporations are fearful that they will lose their jobs in
the near future, but this fear is largely unfounded. According to a recent study, a majority of
companies expected to make new hires in the coming year, while fewer companies expected
to lay off employees. In addition, although it is very disturbing to be laid off, the proliferation of
programs and of workshops designed to improve job-finding skills has made being laid off far
less painful than it once was."
The speaker concludes that employees of major U.S. corporations should not fear that they
will lose their jobs in the near future. To support this conclusion the speaker cites the fact that
most companies expect to hire new employees next year, while fewer plan to lay off
employees. The speaker also cites the current proliferation of job-finding resources. The
argument is problematic in several critical respects.
First of all, the argument depends on the assumption that the total number of expected hires
exceeds the total number of expected layoffs. However, we are not informed whether this is
the case. It is possible that, although more companies expect to hire than lay off employees,
the total number of employees expected to be laid off exceeds the total number expected to be
hired. If true, this fact would serve to refute the speaker's condusion that employees of major
U.S. corporations should not expect to be laid off.
Secondly, the argument assumes that the companies that expect to hire next year are major
U.S. corporations. However, it is entirely possible that these are the firms that expect layoffs,
while it is smaller companies that expect to hire. Common sense tells me that this is a
reasonable possibility, because the number of small companies greatly exceeds the number of
large U.S. corporations. Moreover, even ifit is the major U.S. corporations that expect to do
most of the hiring next year, it is entirely possible that it is these same companies that expect
to do most of the laying off. Again, common sense informs me that this is entirely possible--that
these employers intend to replace many current employees or job positions with new ones.
Thirdly, the argument rests on the dubious assumption that all conditions relevant to a
company's decision to hire or lay off employees will remain unchanged in the near future.
While this might be the case, it is equally possible that unexpected changes in general
economic conditions will result in more layoffs among major U.S. corporations next year than
these firms now anticipate.
Finally, the argument seems to rely partly on the proliferation of job-finding programs. While
this fact might allay the worries of employees that they will not find new employment, it is
irrelevant to whether these employees should expect to be laid offin the fist place. In fact, it can
even be argued that the proliferation of job-finding programs is evidence of increasing job
attrition, and therefore evidence of that these employees' fears are well founded.
In condusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
provide clear evidence that the number of expected hires exceeds the number of expected
lay-offs, and that major U.S. corporations are the companies planning to hire rather than to lay
off employees.























Argument 72
"In the Bayhead Public Library, books that are rarely borrowed continue to take up shelf space
year after year, while people who want to read a recent novel frequently find that the library's
only copy is checked out. Clearly, the library's plan to replace books that are borrowed no more
than once a year with sufficient copies of more recent books will solve this problem. The
protest we have heard since this plan was made public has come from a small, and thus
unrepresentative, group of some thirty people and so should therefore be ignored."
In this argument the speaker supports Bayhead Public Library's plan to replace books that are
borrowed less frequently than once per year with additional copies of recent novels. In support
of this position, the speaker suggests that seldom-borrowed books amount to wasted shelf
space because people who want to read recent novels frequently find the library's only copy
checked out. In further support of this position, the speaker points out that only thirty people
have protested the plan. I find the speaker's position unjustified in several critical respects.
First of all, the speaker ignores the possibility that replacing less popular books with more
copies of popular new novels will undermine the library's primary function as a repository of a
wide variety of books for free public access. New books are available at bookstores, whereas
older, less popular ones are not. Thus the library might lose the patronage of a large
percentage of the community should it adopt the plan.
Secondly, the speaker unfairly implies that the library has only two options: to maintain the
status quo or to follow the proposed plan. Some other alternative---one that wou,Ud appease
protesters while preserving community support--might provide an optimal long-term solution.
For example, perhaps the library can remove books that have not been borrowed for three
years or for five years, rather than for one year. Although this alternate plan would free up less
shelf space than the current plan, it would nevertheless make room for the most popular new
books.
Finally, the mere fact that only thirty people have protested the plan accomplishes litde
toward supporting the speaker's argument--for two reasons. First, this statistic is scant
evidence that the community at large would support the plan; it is entirely possible that many
opponents have simply not voiced their opposition. Second, the thirty protesters might very
well be in a position to influence many other people; or they might be among the library's most
significant financial patrons. In either event, ignoring these protesters might result in the
ultimate loss of community or financial support the library needs to thrive, or even survive.
In sum, the library's plan seems neither well-reasoned nor well-supported. To strengthen her
position, the speaker must convince me that the plan is the only viable option to maintaining
the status quo. To better assess the plan's impact on the library's value as a community
resource, I would need to know what percentage of the library's current inventory would be
replaced under the plan. I would also need to know the extent of influence among the thirty
protesters, and the extent of support for the plan among the vast majority of community
members who have not voiced their opinions about it.























Argument 73
The following appeared in a letter from the owner of the Sunnyside Towers apartment building to its manager.
"One month ago, all the showerheads on the first five floors of Sunnyside Towers were
modified to restrict the water flow to approximately 1/3 of its original force. Although actual
readings of water usage before and after the adjustment are not yet available, the change will
obviously result in a considerable savings for Sunnyside Corporation, since the corporation
must pay for water each month. Except for a few complaints about low water pressure, no
problems with showers have been reported since the adjustment. Clearly, restricting water flow
throughout all the 20 floors of Sunnyside Towers will increase our profits further."
In this letter, the owner of an apartment building concludes that low-flow shower heads
should be installed in showers on all 20 floors of the building, for the purpose of saving money.
To support this conclusion, the owner cites the fact that since installing low-flow heads in
showers on the bottom five floors only a few tenants have complained about low water
pressure, and that no other problems with showers have been reported. However, this
evidence provides little credible support for the owner's argument, as discussed below.
In the first place, the argument depends on the assumption that installation of low-flow
heads on the first five floors has resulted in lower water costs for the owner. However, this
need not be the case. It is equally possible that tenants on these floors compensate for lower
flow by either taking longer showers or by opening their shower valves further than they would
otherwise. It is also possible that water pressure, and therefore water usage, on the remaining
floors has increased as a result. It is even possible that during the month since installation
many of the tenants on the bottom five floors have been absent from the building, and this fact
explains why few tenants have complained.
In the second place, the owner ignores possible indirect consequences of installing lowflow
shower heads on all 20 floors--consequences that in turn might adversely affect the owner's
net operating income. For example, the more low-flow installations the more likely that one or
more tenants will become disgruntled and vacate as a result. In fact, the owner has admitted
that at least a few tenants have complained about these new shower heads. High tenant
turnover might very well serve to increase the owner's overall operating costs.
In the third place, in order to reasonably conclude that low-flow heads will reduce total water
usage in the building the owner must assume that other water uses will remain constant in the
future. However, this will not necessarily be the case. Perhaps the water supplier will raise
rates, or perhaps current tenants will be replaced by other tenants who use more water.
Without ruling out such possibilities the owner cannot justifiably conclude that his total water
costs will decrease after installing low-flow heads in every shower.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the owner must
provide clear evidence that the use of a low-flow shower head in fact reduces total water
usage. To better assess the argument we would need figures comparing water usage before
and after installation. We would also need to know how many of the bottom five floors were
occupied since the new heads were installed, and whether the tenants on these floors are
likely to use more or less water than tenants on the upper floors.























Argument 74
The following is a recommendation from the director of personnel to the president of Professional Printing Company.
"In a recent telephone survey of automobile factory workers, older employees were less likely
to report that having a supervisor present increases their productivity. Among workers aged 18
to 29, 27 percent said that they are more productive in the presence of their immediate
supervisor, compared to 12 percent for those aged 30 or over, and only 8 percent for those
aged 50 or over. Clearly, if our printing company hires mainly older employees, we will
increase productivity and save money because of the reduced need for supervisors."
In this argument the personnel director of Professional Printing Company (PPC)
recommends hiring older workers in order to increase productivity, as well as to save money by
reducing costs of supervision. To support this recommendation, the director cites an
auto-industry telephone survey ostensibly showing that older workers are generally less
productive under close supervision than otherwise, whereas younger workers are generally
more productive under close supervision than otherwise. This argument is flawed in several
critical respects.
A threshold problem with the argument involves the statistical reliability of the survey. The
director provides no evidence that the number of respondents is statistically significant or that
the respondents were representative of auto workers in general. Lacking information about the
randomness and size of the survey's sample, the director cannc;to make a convincing
argument based on that survey.
Even if the survey's respondents are representative of the entire population of auto workers,
the argument relies on the assumption that the responses themselves are reliable. Yet the
director ignores the possibility that a young, inexperienced worker is less likely to be forthright
about the value of supervision--for fear of retaliation by that supervisor. For that matter,
younger workers might not have enough experience working without supervision to determine
when they are most productive. Lacking evidence that the respondents' reports were both
truthful and meaningful, the director cannot confidently draw and conclusions about worker
productivity from them.
Even assuming that the survey data accurately reflect the auto industry, the argument
unfairly assumes that supervision affects worker productivity similarly at PPC. Perhaps PPC
employs certain unique equipment or processes that require close worker supervision--even
for older, more experienced workers. For that matter, perhaps youth or inexperience is an
advantage in working productively at PPC, whereas in the auto industry either is a
disadvantage. In short, without accounting for possible differences between PPC and auto
manufacturers the director cannot convince me that his recommendation for PPC is sound.
The argument also assumes that older people are more experienced, and thus less likely to
benefit from supervision, than younger people. Although this assumption might gen erally be
sound, it nevertheless might not hold true for workers at PPC specifically. In other words,
despite their age many younger PPC worker might be more experienced at their jobs, and
therefore more productive without supervision, than many older PPC workers.
Finally, even if hiring older workers will reduce the need for supervision, the director
concludes too hastily that PPC will save money as a result. It is possible that older workers
command a higher wage than younger workers do. If so, these higher wages might offset
production gains and payroll savings accruing from reduced supervision.
In sum, the survey's statistical reliability and its relevance to PPC is questionable. To
strengthen the recommendation the director must provide clear evidence that in the printing
industry, and especially at PPC, older workers are more experienced or otherwise can work
more productively without supervision than younger workers. To better assess the argument, I
would need a detailed cost-benefit analysis that accounts not only for gains in productivity but
also for the possible impact of hiring only older workers on total payroll costs.























Argument 75
The following appeared as part of an article in a health magazine.
"A new discovery warrants a drastic change in the diets of people living in the United States.
Two scientists have recently suggested that omega-3 fatty acids (found in some fish and fish
oils) play a key role in mental health. Our ancestors, who ate less saturated fat and more
polyunsaturated fat, including omega-3 fatty acids, were much less likely to suffer from
depression than we are today. Moreover, modern societies---such as those in Japan and
Taiwan---that consume large quantities of fish report depression rates lower than that in the
United States. Given this link between omega-3 fatty acids and depression, it is important for
all people in the United States to increase their consumption of fish in order to prevent
depression."
The author of this article asserts that people who live in the U.S. should increase their fish
consumption in order to prevent depression. To support this assertion, the author cites the fact
that our ancestors, who were less likely to experience depression than we are today,
consumed more omega-3 fatty acids, which help prevent depression and are found in some
fish and fish oils. The author also cites the fact that in modern societies where people eat more
fish than we do the reported incidence of depression is comparatively iow. However, the
author's reasoning is problematic in several critical respects.
The first problem with the argument involves the comparatively low incidence of depression
among our ancestors. The author assumes that no factor other than the ingestion of omega-3
is responsible for this lower incidence. However, it is entirely possible that environmental or
other dietary factors are instead responsible for the lower incidence. For example, perhaps
other substances common in the U.S. diet today, and which promote depression, were not part
of our ancestors' diets.
Another problem with the argument involves the low incidence of depression reported
among today's fish-eating societies. To reasonably infer a causal relationship between
fish-eating and low rates of depression in these societies, two assumptions are required. The
first is that the types of fish consumed in these societies in fact contain omega-3; however the
artide provides no evidence that this is the case. The second assumption is that the reported
incidence of depression accurately reflects the actual incidence. However, it is entirely
possible that in those societies people generally do not report depression.
A third problem with the argument is that it assumes that omega-3 is only available in fish.
However, the author provides no evidence to substantiate this crucial assumption. Perhaps
people can ingest omega-3 by taking fish oil capsules rather than eating fish. Or perhaps
omega-3 is also found in other foods as well. In either case, the author cannot reasonably
conclude that we must eat more fish to ingest omega-3 and thereby help prevent depression.
Finally, in concluding that people in the U.S. must ingest more omega-3 to prevent
depression, the author infers that this is the only means of prevenl~ag depression. This
reasoning is fallacious. There might be a myriad of alternative ways to prevent depression;
moreover, experience and common sense informs me that this is indeed the case.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it, the author must
provide clear evidence that no other factors explain the comparatively low incidence of
depression among our ancestors. The author must also show that in modem fish-eating
societies people in fact ingest more omega-3 than people in the U.S. do, and that the
incidence of depression is in fact lower in those societies. To better evaluate the argument, we
would need more information about alternative methods of preventing depression and
alternative sources of omega-3.























Argument 76
"A new report suggests that men and women experience pain very differently from one another,
and that doctors should consider these differences when prescribing pain medications. When
researchers administered the same dosage of kappa options--- a painkiller---to 28 men and 20
women who were having their wisdom teeth extracted, the women reported feeling much less
pain than the men, and the easing of pain lasted considerably longer in women. This research
suggests that kappa opioids should be prescribed for women whenever pain medication is
required, whereas men should be given other kinds of pain medication. In addition,
researchers should reevaluate the effects of all medications on men versus women."
This argument condudes that the pain medication kappa opioids (KO) should be prescribed
for women but not for men. To support this condusion the speaker cites a recent study
involving 28 men and 20 women who took KO when having wisdom teeth removed; according
to these patients' reports, the women felt less pain than the men, and for the women the easing
of pain lasted longer. The argument is flawed in several important respects.
One problem with the argument is that since the study involved only 48 people it is
impossible to confidently draw any conclusions about the general population from it.
Specifically, the argument overlooks other possible reasons why these particular women
reported less pain than the men did. The women in the study might have a
higher-than-average pain threshold; conversely, the men in the study might have a
lower-than-average pain threshold. Or perhaps this group of women are less prone to
complain about pain than this group of men---due to their unusually stoical nature or their
experience with painful medical procedures.
Another problem with the argument is that it overlooks other factors that might have
contributed to the amount of pain these patients experienced. Perhaps the women's wisdom
teeth were not as impacted as the men's teeth generally, so that for the women the surgery
was not as invasive and painful. Perhaps some of the women took other medications as well to
help relieve the pain. For that matter, some of the men might have taken certain foods or
medications that counteracted the effects of KO. In short, unless the experiment was
conducted in a controlled environment in which all factors were the same for the men as for the
women, it is impossible to draw any firm conclusions about the comparative effectiveness of
KO for the two sexes.
Even if KO is more effective for women than for men, the argument's conclusion that men
should take another pain medication instead is unwarranted. It is entirely possible that KO is
still the most effective pain medication for men. Without comparing the effectiveness of KO to
that of other pain medications, the speaker simply cannot justify his recommendation that men
avoid KO.
In sum, the argument has not convinced me that men should take a medication other than
KO for pain. To strengthen the argument the speaker must assure me that the men and
women in the study are representative of men and women generally--in terms of their dental
profile, experience in handling pain, and willingness to recognize and report pain. The speaker
must also assure me that the study was performed in a controlled environment where all other
factors possibly affecting pain remained constant. To better assess the argument I would need
to know how effective KO is compared to other medications in reducing pain for men.























Argument 77
The following is a recommendation from the dean at Foley College, a small liberal arts college, to the president of the college.
"Since college-bound students are increasingly concerned about job prospects after
graduation, Foley College should attempt to increase enrollment by promising to find its
students jobs after they graduate. Many administrators feel that this strategy is a way for Foley
to compete against larger and more prestigious schools and to encourage students to begin
preparing for careers as soon as they enter college. Furthermore, a student who must choose
a career path within his or her first year of college and who is guaranteed a job after graduation
is more likely to successfully complete the coursework that will prepare him or her for the
future."
The dean of Foley College claims that by guaranteeing prospective students that they will
obtain jobs immediately upon graduation Foley can increase its enrollment and more
effectively compete against more prestigious schools. To support this assertion the dean
claims that students who commit early to a course of study and are guaranteed eventual
employment are more likely to complete that coursework and will be better prepared for the
future. On several grounds, however, the dean's argument is unconvincing.
First of all, the argument assumes that providing this guarantee will in fact result in
increased enrollment. However, the dean provides no evidence that this will be the case. It is
entirely possible that the sort of student attracted to Foley in the first place would not find such
a guarantee a particularly enticing feature. In fact, since Foley is a liberal arts college its
students are more likely to be interested in graduate-level study rather than immediate
employment upon graduation.
Secondly, the dean provides no support for the claim that because of the proposed
guarantee Foley students would be more likely to successfully complete the coursework they
choose as entering freshman. To the contrary, experience and common sense inform us that
while in college students often change their minds about their best career direction.
Accordingly, by requiting an early commitment to a course of study Foley might be doing its
students a disservice in terms of helping them select the course of study that they are most
likely to complete successfuUy.
Thirdly, the dean provides no support for the final conclusion that the earlier a student's
commitment to a course of study the better prepared the student will be for the future. It is
entirely possible that exploring diverse options during the first year or two of college is a better
way to prepare for one's future by providing the sort of well-rounded education that one might
need for career flexibility. Without addressing this issue the dean cannot justifiably conclude
that the proposed guarantee will better prepare Foley students for the funxre.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the dean must
provide statistical evidence that college students who commit early to a course of study or who
are promised eventual employment in that field are more likely than other college students to
succeed in college and in their careers. Finally, to better evaluate the argu ment, we would
need more information about why prospective students apply to Foley in the first place.























Argument 78
The following is a letter to the editor of the Glenville Gazette, a local newspaper.
"Over the past few years, the number of people who have purchased advance tickets for the
Glenville Summer Concert series has declined, indicating lack of community support. Although
the weather has been unpredictable in the past few years, this cannot be the reason for the
decline in advance ticket purchases, because many people attended the concerts even in bad
weather. Clearly, then, the reason for the decline is the choice of music, so the organizers of
the concert should feature more modern music in the future and should be sure to include
music composed by Richerts, whose recordings Glenville residents purchase more often than
any other contemporary recordings. This strategy will undoubtedly increase advance ticket
purchases and will increase attendance at the concerts."
This letter recommends that Glenville feature modern music, especially the music of
Richerts, at its summer concerts in order to boost advance ticket sales and attendance. To
support this recommendation the letter's author points out that advance-ticket sales have
declined over the past few years, but that unpredictable weather cannot be the reason for the
decline because "many people attended the concerts even in bad weather." The author
concludes that choice of music must be the reason for the decline, then reasons further that
since Richerts' recordings are very popular among Glenville residents featuring Richerts'
music at the concerts would boost ticket sales and attendance. I find this argument to be
logically unconvincing in several respects.
As a threshold matter, the author unfairly equates the number of ticket purchasers with the
number of tickets purchased. The author ignores the possibility that the average number of
tickets sold to each purchaser is increasing and, as a result, the total number of tickets is not
declining--or perhaps even increasing. Thus the author cannot convincingly conclude that
Glenville has a ticket-sale problem in the first place.
Even if the actual number of tickets sold in advance has been declining, the author
condudes too hastily that unpredictable weather cannot be the reason for the decline. Perhaps
concert attendees during the past few years have now learned from their experience with bad
concert weather not to purchase advance tickets again. Besides, the mere fact that "many
people" attended concerts in bad weather proves nothing unless the author can show that total
attendance has been lower in bad weather than in good weather.
Even assuming unpredictable weather is not the reason for the decline in advance ticket
sales, the author falsely assumes that the decline must be attributable to choice of music. This
"either-or" argument is fallacious in that it ignores other possible causes of the decline. For
example, perhaps during the last few years Glenville has begun its promotional efforts
unusually late. Or perhaps the number of oudets where tickets are available in advance has
declined. For that matter, perhaps Glenville's demographics are in flux so that the total number
of residents willing and able to attend summer concerts is declining.
Finally, even assuming that choice of music is the true cause of the decline in advance ticket
sales, the author fails to provide adequate evidence that choosing modern music, and
Richerts' compositions in particular, will boost sales and attendance. The author unfairly
assumes that people who purchase recordings are the same group that would be inclined to
attend live concerts. Lacking evidence that this is the case, the author cannot convince me that
the proposed course of action will bring about its intended result.
In sum, the argument is logically unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
fzrst establish a dear causal relationship between the number of people buying advance
tickets and actual concert attendance. The author must also provide evidence--perhaps by
way of a reliable survey--that the "many people" who have attended the concerts in bad
weather are likely to do so again despite their experience. The author must then consider and
eliminate all other possible explanations for the decline. Finally, to better assess the argument
I would need more information about the musical tastes of the Glenville residents who are
most inclined to attend live concerts.























Argument 79
The following is a letter from a professor at Xanadu College to the college's president.
"The development of an extensive computer-based long-distance learning program will
enhance the reputation of Xanadu College. This program would allow more students to enroll
in our courses, thereby increasing our income from student tuition. Traditional courses could
easily be adapted for distance learners, as was shown by the adaptation of two traditional
courses for our distance learning trial project last year. Also, by using computer programs and
taped lectures, faculty will have fewer classroom obligations and more time to engage in
extensive research, thereby enhancing the reputation of Xanadu."
In this letter a Xanadu College professor asserts that the development of an extensive
distance-learning program would enhance the college's reputation, as well as increasing total
enrollment and therefore total tuition income. To support this assertion the professor points out
that in last year's trial program two traditional courses were easily adapted for distance
learning. Next, the professor reasons that with more free time faculty could engage in
extensive research, which in turn would enhance the college's reputation. The argument is
flawed in several critical respects.
First of all, the professor's dalm that an increase in enrollment would result in an increase in
tuition income is warranted only if Xanadu students would be willing to pay a sufficiently high
fee for distance-learning courses. However, it is entirely possible that Xanadu's distance
learning courses would not command as high a fee as its traditional courses, and that
Xanadu's total tuition income would actually decline if this less expensive alternative were
available to Xanadu students.
Secondly, the professor's dual claims about distance learning--that it would enhance
Xanadu's reputation and that it would increase enrollment and income--might very well be
mutually exclusive altematives. The availability of distance-learning courses might actually
diminish Xanadu's overall reputation for quality education. Without addressing this issue the
professor cannot justifiably conclude that the distance-learning alternative would achieve both
goals.
A third problem with the argument involves last year's trial project. Despite the fact that two
particular courses were easily adapted to distance learning, other courses might not be as
adaptable. Common sense informs me that certain courses, especially in the arts, require
hands-on learning to be effective. Thus the professor cannot justify her claim oll the basis of
the trial project.
Finally, the professor's claim that distance learning would afford Xanadu faculty more free
time to engage in extensive research raises two problems. First, it is possible that the time
needed for faculty to adapt their courses for distance learning would equal or even exceed the
time they would save by not teaching traditional classes. Second, even if a net time savings
does result, the professor provides no evidence that Xanadu faculty would actually use this
extra free time for research, or that additional research would in fact enhance Xanadu's
reputation.
In condusion, the argument is indefensible as it stands. To strengthen it the professor must
provide specific information about Xanadu's current reputation, and provide clear evidence
that distance learning would in fact enhance this reputation. The professor must also convince
us that the two courses in the trial project were representative of Xanadu's other courses--in
terms of the ease with which the faculty could adapt their courses to distance learning. Finally,
to better assess the argument we would need a detailed analysis comparing loss in tuition from
traditional-course enrollment with expected gains in tuition from distance-learning enrollment.























Argument 80
The following is a letter to the editor of the Roseville Gazette.
"Despite opposition from some residents of West Roseville, the arguments in favor of merging
the townships of Roseville and West Roseville are overwhelming. First, residents in both
townships are confused about which authority to contact when they need a service; for
example, the police department in Roseville receives many calls from residents of West
Roseville. This sort of confusion would be eliminated with the merger. Second, the savings in
administrative costs would be enormous, since services would no longer be duplicated: we
would have only one fire chief, one tax department, one mayor, and so on. And no jobs in city
government would be lost---employees could simply be reassigned. Most importantly, the
merger will undoubtedly attract business investments as it did when the townships of Hamden
and North Hamden merged ten years ago."
This editorial recommends the merger of Roseville and West RoseviUe. The author claims
that the merger would (1) eliminate confusion among both townships' residents about which
authority to call for services; (2) reduce aggregate administrative costs by eliminating
duplicative jobs and services, and (3) attract business investment as did the merger of
Hamden and North Hamden ten years ago. The author claims further that the merger would
result in certain job reassignments but not in the loss of any jobs for current municipal
employees. I find these claims problematic in several respects.
First, although a merger might be necessary to eliminate current confusion about which
authority to contact for services, the editorial overlooks the possibility that the merger will not in
itself suffice to eliminate this confusion. Specifically, until the residents of both communities are
apprised of the change and learn how to respond appropriately, confusion will continue--and
perhaps even increase in the short term. Thus some measure of community awareness and
responsiveness might also be required for the elimination of confusion.
Secondly, the editorial seems to make two irreconcilable claims. One is that the merger will
result in the elimination of certain duplicative jobs; the other is that no current municipal
employee will become unemployed as a result of the merger. The editorial fails to consider that
eliminating duplicative jobs would decrease the aggregate number of current municipal
employees unless enough new jobs are created to offset the decrease, and that new jobs
would in turn add to administrative costs. Thus as it stands the argument is self-contradictory,
and the author must either modify it by choosing between two competing
objectives--preserving current employment levels and cutting costs---or somehow reconcile
these two objectives.
Thirdly, the author's claim that the merger will attract business investment relies on the hasty
assumption the newly merged Roseville would be similar to Hamden in every way affecting
their attractiveness to business investment. Perhaps Hamden's business tax rates, labor pool,
or even climate are more attractive than the newly merged Roseville's would be. If so, then the
proposed merger in itself might accomplish little toward attracting business investment to
RoseviUe. In other words, without evidence that Hamden and the newly merged Roseville
would be equally attractive to business investments I cannot accept the author's conclusion
that a merger will carry the same result for Roseville as for Hamden.
In sum, the editorial is not only logically unsound but also relies on several doubtful
assumptions. To strengthen the argument the author must modify the recommendation to
account for other measures needed to eliminate the confusion mentioned in the editorial. The
author must also provide a cost-benefit analysis that accounts for the costs of creating new
jobs to offset the elimination of duplicative jobs. FinaUy, the author must show that the new
RoseviUe would be just as attractive to business investment as the new Hamden has been.























Argument 81
"The Department of Education in the state of Attra recommends that high school students be
assigned homework every day. Yet a recent statewide survey of high school math and science
teachers calls the usefulness of daily homework into question. In the district of Sanlee, 86
percent of the teachers reported assigning homework three to five times a week, whereas in
the district of Marlee, less than 25 percent of the teachers reported assigning homework three
to five times a week. Yet the students in Marlee earn better grades overall and are less likely to
be required to repeat a year of school than are the students in Sanlee. Therefore, all teachers
in our high schools should assign homework no more than twice a week, if at all."
The speaker argues that if the state board of education required that homework be assigned
to high school students no more than twice per week academic performance would improve.
To support this assertion the speaker cites a statewide survey of math and science teachers.
According to the survey, students in the Mafiee district, who are assigned homework no more
than once per week, achieve better grades and are less likely to repeat a school year than
students in the Sanlee district, who are assigned homework every night. Close scrutiny reveals,
however, that this evidence provides little credible support for the speaker's assertion.
To begin with, the survey appears to suffer from two statistical problems, either of which
renders the survey's results unreliable. First, the speaker relies on statistics from only two
districts; however, it is entirely possible that these two districts are not representative of the
state's school districts overall. Second, the survey involved only math and science teachers.
Yet the speaker draws a broad recommendation for all teachers based on the survey's results.
In addition, the speaker's recommendation relies on the assumption that the amount of
homework assigned to students is the only possible reason for the comparative academic
performance between students in the two districts. However, in all likelihood this is simply not
the case. Perhaps Sanlee teachers are stricter graders then Marlee teachers. Or perhaps
Sanlee teachers are less effective than Marlee teachers, and therefore Sanlee students would
perform more poorly regardless of homework schedule. Or perhaps fewer Sanlee students
than Marlee students actually do their assigned homework. In short, in order to properly
conclude that fewer homework assignments results in better academic performance, the
speaker must first rule out all other feasible explanations for the disparity in academic
performance between the two districts.
Finally, the survey results as reported by the speaker are too vague to support any firm
conclusion. The speaker reports that Sanlee students receive lower grades and are more likely
to repeat a school year then Marlee students. Yet the speaker does not indicate whether this
fact applies to Sanlee and Marlee students generally, or just to math and science students.
The speaker's recommendation for all high school students might be defensible in the former
case, but not in the latter case.
In conclusion, the recommendation that all high school students be assigned homework
once per week at most is indefensible based on the evidence. To strengthen the argument, the
speaker must show that the reported correlation in the areas of math and science is also found
among most other academic subjects. The speaker must also rule out other factors that might
determine the students' grades and their likelihood of repeating a year. Finally, to better assess
the argument we would need to know whether the reported disparity in academic performance
between Sanlee and Marlee students involved only math and science students or all students.























Argument 82
"A recent study suggests that people who are left-handed are more likely to succeed in
business than are right-handed people. Researchers studied photographs of 1,000 prominent
business executives and found that 21 percent of these executives wrote with their left hand.
So the percentage of prominent business executives who are left-handed (21 percent) is
almost twice the percentage of people in the general population who are left-handed (11
percent). Thus, people who are left-handed would be well advised to pursue a career in
business, whereas people who are right-handed would be well advised to imitate the business
practices exhibited by left-handers."
This argument recommends the all left-handed people should pursue a career in business
and that right-handed people should learn to imitate the business practices of left-handed
people. To support this recommendation the speaker cites a study of 1,000 prominent
business executives, among whom 21 percent were photographed while writing with their left
hand. The speaker then points out that only 11 percent of the general population is left-handed.
The argument suffers from several logical flaws and is therefore unconvincing.
First of all, the study amounts to scant evidence of the speaker's implicit condusion that
left-handedness contributes to business success. Just because photographs show a person
writing with his or her left hand does not necessarily mean that the person is left-handed; many
people are ambidextrous--using either hand to write or using one hand to write while using the
other hand for other tasks. Besides, the 1,000 executives from the study are not necessarily
representative of the overall population of prominent business executives. Moreover, many
prominent executives might have risen to their status not by way of their achievements or
business acumen but through other means--such as familial relationships. In short, the
photographs in themselves prove little about the causal relationship between left-handedness
and the ability to succeed in business.
Even if left-handed people are more likely to have an innate ability to succeed in business
than right-handed people are, the author's conclusion that all left-handed people should
pursue business careers unfairly assumes that all left-handed people are similar in terms of
their talents, interests, and motivations. Common sense informs me that the best vocational
choice for any person depends on a variety of factors. Thus without dearer evidence that
left-handed people tend to be successful in business but unsuccessful in other vocations the
speaker cannot justify such a sweeping recommendation for left-handed people.
Even if most left-handed people would be well advised to pursue business careers, the
speaker's recommendation for right-handed people is unwarranted. Common sense informs
me that any innate business acumen with which left-handed people might be endowed cannot
be imitated. Moreover, the speaker assumes without substantiation that the way in which
left-handed people conduct business is the only way to succeed in business. It is entirely
possible that right-handed people have certain natural ways of thinking which lend themselves
better to other business approaches. Without considering and ruling out this possibility the
speaker cannot convince me that right-handed people should imitate the business practices of
left-handed people.
In sum, the argument is logically unsound. To strengthen it the speaker must show that the
1,000 executives in the photos were in fact using their dominant hand, that they are
representative of all prominent executives, and that prominence in business is generally the
result of an executive's business practices. To better assess the argument I would need to
compare the percentage of left-handed people who succeed in business with those who
succeed in other vocations. I would also need more information about the business practices
of left-handed people to determine whether they employ similar practices, and whether
right-handed people who have succeeded in business employ different practices.























Argument 83
The following is a letter from an editor at Liber Publishing Company to the company's president.
"In recent years, Liber has unfortunately moved away from its original mission: to publish the
works of regional small-town authors instead of those of big-city authors. Just last year, 90
percent of the novels we published were written by authors who maintain a residence in a big
city. Although this change must have been intended to increase profits, it has obviously
backfired, because Liber is now in serious financial trouble. The only way to address this
problem is to return to our original mission. If we return to publishing only the works of regional
small-town authors, our financial troubles will soon be resolved."
An editor at Liber Publishing contends here that Liber will become profitable again if and
only it returns to its original mission of publishing works primarily by small-town authors. To
support this contention the editor cites the fact that since moving away from that mission Liber
has become unprofitable. The editor's argument suffers from a series of logical problems, and
is therefore wholly unpersuasive.
To begin with, the editor's recommendation depends on the assumption that no factors other
than Liber's shift to big-city authors caused Liber's declining profits. However, common sense
informs me that this assumption is a poor one. A myriad of other factors, including
management and marketing problems, or shifting demand among book buyers, might just as
likely be the cause of Hber's declining profits. Without ruling out these and other possible
causes, the editor cannot justifiably conclude that by renaming to its original mission Liber will
return to profitability.
Even assuming Liber's move away from small-town authors was the cause of its dedining
profits, the editor's argument suffers from two classic fallacies which render the
recommendation indefensible. First, the editor infers that the only way for Liber to retum to
profitability is to return to its original mission. Yet absent evidence to the contrary, other means
of boosting its profits might also be available. Secondly, the editor infers that returning to its
original mission is a sufficient condition for Liber's returning to profitability. This inference is
also fallacious, at least without additional evidence to support it.
Finally, a careful reading of the argument reveals two additional problems. The editor
indicates that 90% of Liber's novels are written by authors who maintain a residence in a big
city. However, the editor fails to indicate whether these authors also maintain residences in
small towns. If they do, then Liber has not in fact departed from its original mission, and the
editor's argument is essentially moot. In addition, the editor fails to indicate what percentage of
Liber's publications are novels; the lower the percentage the less likely that Liber has in fact
departed from its original mission.
In conclusion, the editor's argument cannot be taken seriously as it stands. To strengthen it,
the editor must show that Liber has in fact departed from its original mission, and that this
departure was the actual cause of Liber's declining profits. To better evaluate the argument we
would need to know what other means, if any, are available to Liber to help return the company
to profitability.























Argument 84
"The country Myria, which charges fees for the use of national parks, reports little evidence
of environmental damage. This strongly suggests that for the country Illium, the best way to
preserve public lands is to charge people more money when they are using national parks and
wilderness areas for activities with heavy environmental impact. By collecting fees from those
people who overuse public lands, Illium will help preserve those lands for present and future
generations."
In this argument the speaker recommends that Illium's national parks charge higher fees to
visitors whose activities carry a heavy environmental impact than to other visitors, in order to
help preserve Illium's public lands for the present and future generations. To support this
recommendation the speaker points out that the country of Myria charges fees for use of its
national parks and that Myria reports little evidence of environmental damage. This argument
is flawed in several critical respects.
First, the argument assumes too hastily that the reports of conditions in Myria's parks are
accurate. It is entirely possible that the reports were based on only cursory studies, or on
studies at only a small percentage of Myria's parks; in either case the reports would amount to
scant evidence of the extent of overall environmental damage in Myria's parks. Moreover, in
my observation many environmental problems become apparent only after the passage of
considerable time. Accordingly, if the reports are based on observations made over a brief
period then the reports might be unreliable indicators of long-term environmental damage.
Even if little environmental damage has occurred at Myria's national parks, Myria's park fees
are not necessarily responsible for the lack of damage--as the argument assumes. Perhaps
the true reason for the pristine condition of these parks is that visitors engage in few activities
that carry heavy environmental impact. Or perhaps visitors or park rangers take certain
measures to mitigate the effects of those activities. For that matter, perhaps the number of
visitors to Myria's parks has always been soinsignificant that they could inflict little damage in
any event. Unless the speaker can rule out these and other possible explanations for the
pristine condition of Myria's parks, I cannot accept the further assertion that Illium would help
preserve its parks by following Myria's example.
Even assuming Myria's park fees have prevented environmental damage in those parks, the
speaker's recommendation depends on the additional assumption that the proposed fee
increase will carry the same result for IUium. Yet it is entirely possible that the vast majority of
Illium's park visitors would happily pay higher fees and continue heavy impact activities
unabated. It is also possible that certain natural conditions in Illium's parks not present in
Myria's parks exacerbate the impact of damaging activities. Thus, unless the speaker can
show that conditions in IUium and Myria are similar in all respects that might affect the
environmental impact of park fees and visitor activities, I cannot take the speaker's
recommendation seriously.
In sum, the argument depends on a series of doubtful assumptions and is therefore
unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the speaker must provide dear evidence that
Myria's park environment has in fact not been damaged by visitors and that but for its fees
Myria's parks would have incurred significantly more environmental damage. The speaker
must also show that Myria and IUium are similar in terms of the extent to which park visitors
engage in heavy-impact activities and the willingness of visitors to pay for engaging in these
activities.























Argument 85
"Statistics collected from dentists indicate that three times more men than women faint while
visiting the dentist. This evidence suggests that men are more likely to be distressed about
having dental work done than women are. Thus, dentists who advertise to attract patients
should target the male consumer and emphasize both the effectiveness of their anesthetic
techniques and the sensitivity of their staff to nervous or suffering patients."
This argument contends that dentists' advertisements should target male patients, and
should focus on assuaging distress about the pain associated with dental work. To support this
assertion the argument cites statistics showing that three times more men than women faint
while visiting dentists. The argument suffers from several logical problems, and is therefore
unpersuasive.
To begin with, the argument depends on the assumption that men who faint while visiting the
dentist do so because they are distressed about the sorts of factors that the proposed
advertising aims to address. Yet the argument provides no evidence clearly estabfishing this
causal relationship. It is equally likely that other factors are instead responsible for the fact that
more men than women faint at the dentist's office. Perhaps on average men suffer from more
painful dental problems than women, explaining why more men than women faint at dental
offices. Without ruling out this and other altemative explanations, the speaker cannot convince
me that any advertising technique will reduce either distress or fainting among male patients.
Another problem with the argument is that the speaker provides no evidence that the
proposed advertising techniques will have the intended effect. Perhaps fewer men than
women notice dental advertisements. Or perhaps the proposed advertising techniques will
have the opposite effect--by calling attention to the very sorts of images that cause distress
and fainting. The speaker must address these possibilities and rule them out before we can
accept the recommendation.
Finally, the speaker's recommendation relies on two unsubstantiated assumptions about the
statistics that the speaker cites. The first is that the patients contributing to these statistics are
representative of all dental patients. It is entirely possible, for instance, that a disproportionate
number of male patients contributed to the statistics, rendering them biased and therefore
unreliable. The second unsubstantiated assumption is that the number of patients contributing
to these statistics is large enough to be statistically significant. Unless the speaker can
substantiate this assumption, he cannot justifiably rely on these statistics to draw any general
inferences about dental patients.
In conclusion, the argument cannot be taken seriously as it stands. To strengthen it, the
speaker must show why men become distressed and faint during visits to their dentists, and
that the proposed advertising techniques would in fact achieve their intended result. To better
evaluate the argument we would need more information about the statistics that the argument
cites--specifically, how many patients contributed to these statistics and whether these patients
are representative of dental patients in general.























Argument 86
"The citizens of Forsythe have adopted healthier lifestyles. Their responses to a recent survey
show that in their eating habits they conform more closely to government nutritional
recommendations than they did ten years ago. Furthermore, there has been a fourfold
increase in sales of food products containing kiran, a substance that a scientific study has
shown reduces cholesterol. This trend is also evident in reduced sales of sulia, a food that few
of the healthiest citizens regularly eat."
In this argument the speaker concludes that Forsythe citizens have adopted healthier
lifestyles. To justify this contusion the speaker cites a recent survey of Forsythe citizens
suggesting that their eating habits now conform more closely to government nutritional
recommendations than they did ten years ago. The speaker also points out that sales of tdran,
a substance known to reduce cholesterol, have increased fourfold, while sales of sulia, which
few of Forsythe's healthiest citizens eat regularly, have been declining. This argument is
unpersuasive for several reasons.
First, the survey must be shown to be reliable before I can accept any contusions based
upon it. Specifically, the responses must be accurate, and the respondents must be statistically
significant in number and representative of the overall Forsythe citizenry in terms of eating
habits. Without evidence of the survey's reliability, it is impossible to draw any firm conclusions
about the current dietary habits of Forsythe citizens based on the survey.
Second, the argument relies on the dubious assumption that following the government's
nutrition recommendations promotes health to a greater extent than following any other
nutrition regime. It is entirely possible that the dietary habits of Forsythe citizens were healthier
ten years ago than they are now. Thus without evidence to substantiate this assumption the
speaker cannot reasonably conclude that the diet of Forsythe's citizens has become more
nutritional.
Third, the speaker assumes too hastily that increasing sales of products with kiran indicates
healthier eating habits. Perhaps Forsythe citizens are eating these foods in amounts or at
intervals that undermine the health benefits of kiran. Without ruling out this possibility the
speaker cannot reasonably conclude with any confidence that increased kiran consumption
has resulted in improved health for Forsythe's citizens.
Fourth, the mere fact that few of Forsythe's healthiest citizens eat sulia regularly does not
mean that sulia is detrimental to health as the speaker assumes. It is possible that sulia has
no effect on health, or that it actually promotes health. Lacking firm evidence that sulia affects
health adversely, and that healthy people avoid sulia for this reason, the speaker cannot justify
any conclusions about the health of Forsythe's citizens from the mere fact that sulia sales are
declining.
Finally, even if the dietary changes to which the speaker refers are healthful ones, the
speaker overlooks the possibility that Forsythe citizens have been making other changes in
their dietary or other habits that offset these healthful changes. Unless all other habits affecting
health have remained unchanged, the speaker cannot justifiably conclude that the overall
lifestyle of Forsythe's citizenry has become healthier.
In sum, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the speaker must show
that the survey accurately reflects the dietary habits of Forsythe's citizens, and that by
following the government's nutritional recommendations more closely these citizens are in fact
healthier. The speaker must also show that Forsythe's citizens have not made other dietary or
other lifestyle changes that offset healthful changes. Finally, to better assess the argument I
would need more information about the manner and extent to which Forsythe's citizens now
consume kiran, and about the healthfulness of sulia.























Argument 87
"Humans arrived in the Kaliko Islands about 7,000 years ago, and within 3,000 years most of
the large mammal species that had lived in the forests of the Kaliko Islands had become
extinct. Yet humans cannot have been a factor in the species' extinctions, because there is no
evidence that the humans had any significant contact with the mammals. Further,
archaeologists have discovered numerous sites where the bones of fish had been discarded,
but they found no such areas containing the bones of large mammals, so the humans cannot
have hunted the mammals. Therefore, some climate change or other environmental factor
must have caused the species' extinctions."
In this argument the speaker condudes that humans could not have been a factor in the
extinction of large mammal species in the Kaliko islands 3,000 years ago. To justify this
conclusion, the speaker points out that no evidence exists that humans hunted or had other
significant contact with these mammals. The speaker also points out that while archeologists
have found bones of discarded fish in the islands, they have not found any discarded mammal
bones there. For three reasons, this evidence lends little credibility to the speaker's argument.
First, the argument condudes too hastily that humans could not have had any significant
contact with these mammals. In relying on the lack of physical evidence such as bones, the
speaker overlooks the possibility that humans exported mammals--particularly their
bones--during this time period. Without ruling out this alternative explanation for the
disappearance of these species from the islands, the speaker cannot justify the conclusion
that humans were not a factor in their extinction from the islands.
Secondly, the argument relies on the assumption that without significant contact with these
other species humans could not have been a factor in their extinction. But the speaker
provides no evidence that this is the case. Moreover, perhaps humans drove these other
species away from their natural habitat not by significant contact but merely by intruding on
their territory. Or perhaps humans consumed the plants and animals on which these species
relied for their subsistence. Either scenario would explain how humans could have been a
factor in the extinction of these species despite a lack of significant contact.
Thirdly, the speaker assumes that the bones of fish that archeologists have found discarded
on the island were discarded by humans, and not by some other large mammal. However, the
speaker provides no evidence to substantiate this assumption. Given other possible
explanations for these discarded fish bones, this evidence in itself lends little credible support
to the speaker's theory about the extinction of large species of mammals.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it, the speaker must
rule out the possibility that humans exported the bones of these other species. To better
evaluate the argument, we would need more information about the diet of humans and of the
now-extinct mammals during that time period; particularly, we would need to know whether
those other mammals also fed on the fish whose discarded bones have been found on the
islands.























Argument 88
The following appeared in a newspaper feature story.
"At the small, nonprofit hospital in the town of Saluda, the average length of a patient's stay is
two days; at the large, for-profit hospital in the nearby city of Megaville, the average patient
stay is six days. Also, the cure rate among patients in the Saluda hospital is about twice that of
the Megaville hospital. The Saluda hospital has more employees per patient than the hospital
in Megaville, and there are few complaints about service at the local hospital. Such data
indicate that treatment in smaller, nonprofit hospitals is more economical and of better quality
than treatment in larger, for-profit hospitals."
This newspaper story concludes that the small, nonprofit hospital in Saluda provides more
efficient, better-quality care than the for-profit hospital in Megaville. To justify this conclusion
the author cites the following comparisons between the Saluda hospital and the Megaville
hospital: At the Saluda hospital the average length of a patient's stay is shorter, the cure rate
and employee-patient ratio are both higher, and the number of complaints from patients is
lower. However, careful consideration of these facts reveals that they fail to justify the author's
conclusion.
In the first place, the author unfairly assumes that a shorter hospital stay indicates a quicker
recovery and therefore better care. It is equally possible that the Saluda hospital simply cannot
afford to keep patients as long as it should to ensure proper care and recovery. Perhaps the
hospital sends patients home prematurely for the purpose of freeing up beds for other patients.
Since the author has failed to rule out other possible explanations for this shorter average stay,
I remain unconvinced based on this evidence that the Saluda hospital provides better care
than Megaville's hospital.
In the second place, the mere fact that the rate of cure at the Saluda hospital is higher than
at MegaviUe's hospital proves nothing about the quality of care at either hospital. It is entirely
possible that more Saluda patients suffer from curable problems than Megaville patients do.
Without considering this possibility the author cannot justifiably rely on curerates to draw any
conclusions about comparative quality of care.
In the third place, a higher employee-patient ratio at Saluda is weak evidence of either better
care or greater efficiency. Common sense informs me that it is the competence of each
employee, not the number of employees, that determines overall q, ality of care. Besides, it is
entirely possible that the comparatively large staff at Saluda is the result of organizational
inefficiency, and that a smaller staff of more effective, better managed people would provide
better care.
Finally, the mere fact that the Saluda hospital receives fewer patient complaints than
MegaviUe's hospital proves nothing about either efficiency or quality of care. Even though the
number of complaints is smaller, the percentage of patients complaining might be higher. Also,
MegaviUe's staff might openly encourage patient feedback while Saluda's does not. This
scenario accords with my observation that for-profit organizations are generally more
concerned with customer satisfaction than non-profit organizations are.
In sum, the facts that the story cites amount to weak evidence that the Saluda hospital
provides more efficient, better-quality care than Megaville's hospital. To strengthen the
argument, the author must provide dear evidence that at the Saluda hospital patients are
released earlier because they have received better care--rather than for some other reason. To
better assess the argument, I would need to compare the percentage of MegaviUe's hospital
patients who suffer from curable problems with the percentage of Saluda patients who suffer
from similar problems. Also, I would need more information from each hospital about complaint
procedures and the percentage of patients who lodge complaints.























Argument 89
The following appeared as a letter to the editor of a farming publication.
"With continuing publicity about the need for healthful diets, and with new research about the
harmful effects of eating too much sugar, nationwide demand for sugar will no doubt decline.
Therefore, farmers in our state should use the land on which they currently grow sugar cane to
grow peanuts, a food that is rich in protein and low in sugar. Farmers in the neighboring
country of Palin greatly increased their production of peanuts last year, and their total revenues
from that crop were quite high."
This letter concludes that to increase farm revenue this country's farmers should replace
their sugar crops with peanuts. To support this assertion, the letter's author claims that demand
for sugar is sure to decline due to a growing awareness of the health hazards of eating too
much sugar. The author also cites the fact that in the nearby country of Palm increased peanut
production has resulted in increased revenue for farmers. However, the author's argument
relies on several poor assumptions, and is therefore unpersuasive as it stands.
A threshold problem with the letter involves the new research that the author cites to support
his condusion. The author fails to indicate whether consumers are in fact aware of the new
research about the harmful effects of eating too much sugar, or whether consumers eat too
much sugar in the first place. If consumers are unaware of the research, or if they do not
currently eat too much sugar, then this research lends no support to the author's assertion that
sugar consumption is likely to decline as a result of the new research.
Secondly, the argument unjustifiably assumes that growing consumer awareness of sugar's
health hazards will cause consumers to not only decrease sugar consumption but also
increase peanut consumption. Common sense informs me otherwise, especially considering
the addictive quality of sugar. In fact, the author provides explicitly that peanuts are low in
sugar, suggesting that peanuts are a poor substitute for sugar.
Thirdly, the author's daim that farm revenues will increase should farmers replace sugar
crops with peanuts relies on certain dubious economic assumptions. One such assumption is
that the market price of peanuts will be sufficiently high to compensate for lost revenue from
current sugar sales. Another is that the supply of peanuts will suffice to provide farmers with
sufficient revenue. Absent evidence comparing the market price of sugar to that of peanuts, as
well as evidence about the capacity of this country's farms to grow peanut crops, it is
impossible to assess the author's assertion that replacing sugar crops with peanuts will
increase farm revenues.
Finally, the author's reliance on the fact that peanut-farming revenues in neighboring Pain
have increased is problematic in two respects. First, the analogy depends on the assumption
that dietary tastes of consumers in both countries are similar. However, it is entirely possible
that consumer demand for peanuts in Pain would be higher than that in this country in any
event. This would explain why, in Palin, demand has met increased production, and therefore
why Palin's peanut-farming revenues have increased. The analogy also depends on the
assumption that environmental conditions in both countries equally support peanut crops. If
they do not, then the author cannot justifiably rely on the profitability of Pain's peanut farms to
conclude that peanut farms in the author's country would be just as profitable.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it, the author must
demonstrate that this country's consumers will in fact decrease their sugar consumption as a
result of their growing awareness of its health risks. The author must also provide dear
evidence that the demand for peanuts and the revenue from peanut production in this country
are likely to match the current demand for sugar and farm revenue from sugar production,
respectively. To better evaluate the argument we would need to compare the two countries'
climatic and soil conditions; we would also need to compare consumer tastes in Palin with
consumer tastes in the author's country.























Argument 90
The following appeared in a recommendation from the president of Amburg's Chamber of Commerce.
"Last October the city of Belleville installed high intensity lighting in its central business district,
and vandalism there declined almost immediately. The city of Amburg has recently begun
police patrols on bicycles in its business district but the rate of vandalism there remains
constant. Since high intensity lighting is apparently the most effective way to combat crime, we
should install such lighting throughout Amburg. By reducing crime in this way, we can revitalize
the declining neighborhoods in our city."
Amburg's Chamber-of-Commerce president has recommended high-intensity lighting
throughout Amburg as the best means of reducing crime and revitnliT, ing city neighbor hoods.
In support of this recommendation the president points out that when Belleville took similar
action vandalism declined there almost immediately. The president also points out that since
Amburg's police began patrolling on bicycles the incidence of vandalism has remained
unchanged. The president's argument is flawed in several critical respects.
First, the argument rests on the unsupported assumption that in BeUeviUe the immediate
decline in vandalism was attributable to the lighting--rather than to some other
phenomenon-and that the lighting has continued to serve as an effective deterrent there.
Perhaps around the same time the city added police units or more after-school youth programs.
Moreover, perhaps since the initial decline vandals have grown accustomed to the lighting and
are no longer deterred by it. Without ruling out other feasible explanations for the decline and
showing that the decline was a lasting one, the president cannot reasonably conclude on the
basis of BelleviUe's experience that the same course of action would serve Amburg's
objectives.
Secondly, the president assumes too hastily that Amburg's bicycle patrol has been
ineffective in deterring vandalism. Perhaps other factors--such as a demographic shift or
worsening economic conditions--have served to increase vandalism while the bicycle patrol
has offset that increase. Thus without showing that all other conditions affecting the incidence
of vandalism have remained unchanged since the police began its bicycle patrol the president
cannot convincingly condude that high-intensity lighting would be a more effective means of
preventing vandalism.
Thirdly, the president falsely assumes that high-intensity lighting and bicycle patrolling are
Amburg's only possible means of reducing crime. In all likelihood Amburg has a myriad of
other choices--such as social programs and juvenile legal-system reforms, to name just a few.
Moreover, undoubtedly vandalism is not the only type of crime in Amburg.
Thus unless the president can show that high-intensity lighting will deter other types of crime
as well I cannot take seriously the president's conclusion that installing high intensity lighting
would be the best way for Amburg to reduce its overall crime rate.
Finally, even if high-intensity lighting would be Amburg's best means of reducing crime in its
central business district, the president's further assertion that reducing crime would result in a
revitalization of city neighborhoods is unwarranted. Perhaps the decline of Amburg's city
neighborhoods is attributable not to the crime rate in Amburg's central business district but
rather to other factors--such as the availability of more attractive housing in the suburbs. And if
the neighborhoods in decline are not located within the central business district the president's
argument is even weaker.
In sum, the recommendation is not well-supported. To bolster it the president must show that
BeUeville's decline in vandalism is lasting and is attributable to the lighting. The president must
also show that lighting would be more effective than any other means at Amburg's disposal to
reduce not just vandalism but other crimes as well. To better assess the recommendation I
would need to know whether Amburg's declining city neighbor-hoods are located within the
central business district, and whether any other factors might have contributed to the decline.























Argument 91
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of the Parkville Daily Newspaper.
"Throughout the country last year, as more and more children below the age of nine
participated in youth-league softball and soccer, over 80,000 of these young players suffered
injuries. When interviewed for a recent study, youth-league softball players in several major
cities also reported psychological pressure from coaches and parents to win games.
Furthermore, education experts say that long practice sessions for these sports take away
time that could be used for academic activities. Since the disadvantages apparently outweigh
any advantages, we in Parkville should discontinue organized athletic competition for children
under nine."
This letter concludes that Parkville should not allow children under age nine to participate in
organized competitive sports. To support this conclusion, the author points out the increasing
number of children nationwide who become injured during athletic competitions. The author
also cites the fact that in some big dries children report undue pressure from coaches and
parents to win, and that long practice sessions take time away from a child's academic pursuits.
However, the author's argument relies on a series of unsubstantiated assumptions, and is
therefore unpersuasive as it stands.
One problem with the argument is that it assumes that the nationwide statistics about the
incidence of sports injuries among youngsters applies equally to Parkville's children. Yet this
might not be the case, for a variety of possible reasons. Perhaps Parkville maintains more
stringent safety standards than the national norm; or perhaps children's sporting events in
Parkville are better supervised by adults, or supervised by more adults. Without ruling out such
possibilities, the author cannot justifiably conclude that Parkville has a sports-injury problem to
begin with.
A second problem with the argument is that it unjustifiably assumes that in Parkville parents
and coaches unduly pressure youngsters to win organized athletic competitions. The only
evidence the author provides to substantiate this assumption are the reports from "big city"
children. We are not informed whether ParkviUe is a big city. Perhaps people who live in big
dries are generally more competitive than other people. If so, and if Parkville is not a big city,
then the author cannot justifiably rely on these reports to conclude that the proposed course of
action is necessary.
A third problem with the argument is that it unfairly assumes that children do not benefit
academically from participating in competitive sports. It is entirely possible that such sports
provide children with the sort of break from academics that helps them to be more productive
academically. It is also possible that the competitive drive that these sports might instill in
young children carries over to their academics and spurs them on to perform well in school.
Without considering such potential academic benefits, the author cannot reasonably conclude
that for young children the disadvantages of participating in athletic competition outweigh the
benefits.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To better evaluate the argument
we would need more information about the incidence of sports injuries among young children
in Parkville. To strengthen the argument the author must demonstrate that ParkviUe's parents
and coaches exert the kind of pressure on their children reported by "big city" children and, if
so, that this pressure in fact contributes to the sort of problems with which the author is
concerned.























Argument 92
"It is known that in recent years, industrial pollution has caused the Earth's ozone layer to thin,
allowing an increase in the amount of ultraviolet radiation that reaches the Earth's surface. At
the same time, scientists have discovered, the population of a species of salamander that lays
its eggs in mountain lakes has declined. Since ultraviolet radiation is known to be damaging to
delicate tissues and since salamander eggs have no protective shells, it must be the case that
the increase in ultraviolet radiation has damaged many salamander eggs and prevented them
from hatching. This process will no doubt cause population declines in other species, just as it
has in the salamander species."
In this argument the speaker claims that increased ultraviolet radiation due to thinning of the
Earth's ozone layer is responsible for the significant decline in the number of salamanders who
lay their eggs in mountain lakes, and that this thinning will cause population declines in other
species. To justify these claims the speaker points out that salamander eggs lack a protective
shell and thus their tissues are highly susceptible to radiation damage, then reasons that the
increased radiation must damage these eggs and prevent them from hatching. The argument
is problematic in several critical respects, which render it unconvincing.
To begin with, the argument assumes that the salamander population is in fact declining, yet
this assumption is not bom out by the mere fact that the number of salamanders laying eggs in
mountain lakes is declining. It is entirely possible that in other locations the salamander
population is increasing. For that matter, perhaps the number of eggs a salamander lays in a
mountain lake is increasing on average. Either scenario, if true, would seriously call into
question any prediction about population changes for salamanders or for other species.
Even if the total salamander population is declining, an inverse correlation between
ultraviolet radiation and salamander population does not suffice in itself to prove that the
former causes the latter. The speaker must account for the possibility that the number of eggs
salamanders lay is declining in all areas--regardless of the amount of radiation reaching the
surface. The speaker must also eliminate all other reasonable explanations for the decline. For
example, if the population of species that prey on salamanders or eat their eggs is increasing,
this would explain the population decline and therefore undermine the speaker's entire
argument.
Even assuming that the total salamander population is declining as a result of increasing
radiation, the speaker cannot reasonably infer that other species are equally vulnerable to a
population decline as a result. Perhaps the absence of a shell, combined with its
mountain-lake location, renders a salamander egg more vulnerable to ultraviolet radiation than
any other type of egg. If so, this fact would cast considerable doubt on the speaker's prediction
for other species.
Finally, the speaker's grave prediction relies on the assumption that the ozone-thinning
process will not reverse in the future. Although this assumption might be born out, on the other
hand it might not. Without providing some assurance that the ozone layer will at least continue
to be as thin as it is now, the speaker cannot convince me that other species will experience a
population decline as a result of radiation damage to eggs.
In sum, the speaker's argument depends on a series of doubtful assumptions, and is
therefore weak. To strengthen it the speaker must supply better evidence that the total
salamander population is declining, and must rule out all other possible explanations for that
decline. The speaker must also provide clear evidence that the current level of radiation
reaching the surface is as potentially damaging to the eggs of other species, and must account
for why other species have not already experienced a declining population. Finally, to better
assess the argument I would need a reliable prognosis for the Earth's ozone layer.























Argument 93
The following appeared in a memorandum from the planning department of an electric power company.
"Several recent surveys indicate that homeowners are increasingly eager to conserve energy
and manufacturers are now marketing many home appliances, such as refrigerators and air
conditioners, that are almost twice as energy-efficient as those sold a decade ago. Also, new
technologies for better home insulation and passive solar heating are readily available to
reduce the energy needed for home heating. Therefore, we anticipate that the total demand for
electricity in our area will not increase, and may decline slightly. Since our three electric
generating plants in operation for the past 20 years have always met our needs, construction
of new generating plants should not be necessary."
The author of this memo concludes that there is no need for an additional electric power
plant in the area because total electricity demand in the area is not likely to increase in the
future. To support this conclusion the author cites the availability of new energy-efficient
appliances and systems for homes, and the eagerness of area homeowners to conserve
energy. However, the argument relies on several doubtful assumptions, and is therefore
unpersuasive as it stands.
First, the author's projection for flat or declining total demand for electricity ignores business
and commercial electricity usage. It is entirely possible that area businesses will increase their
use of electricity in the future and that total electricity consumption will actually increase
despite flat or declining residential demand. The author's projection also ignores the possibility
that the number of area residents will increase in the future, thereby resulting in an increase in
electricity usage regardless of whether more efficient appliances are used in area homes.
Without taking into account these possibilities, the author cannot persuade me that total
demand for electricity will not increase in the future.
Secondly, the author's conclusion relies on the assumption that area residents will actually
purchase and install the energy-saving appliances and systems the author describes.
Admittedly, the author points out that homeowners are "eager to conserve energy."
Nevertheless, these homeowners might not be able to afford these new systems and
appliances. Moreover, the energy-efficient insulation that the author mentions might be
available only for new home construction, or it might be a gas system. In either case, the mere
availability of this system might have no effect on total electric usage in existing homes.
A final problem involves the assertion that no new electric power plants are needed because
the three existing plants, which are 20 years old, have always been adequate for the area's
electric needs. The author fails to account for the possibility that the old plants are themselves
less energy efficient than a new plant using new technology would be, or that the old plants
need to be replaced due to their age, or for some other reason. Besides, this assertion ignores
the possible influx of residents or businesses in the future, thereby increasing the demand for
electricity beyond what the three existing plants can meet.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
show that area residents can afford the new energy-efficient appliances and systems, and that
area commercial demand for electricity will not increase significantly in the foreseeable future.
In order to better evaluate the argument, we would need to know whether the new
energy-efficient technologies are available to businesses as well, and whether area
businesses plan to use them. We would also need more information about expected changes
in the area's population, and about the condition and energy-efficiency of the three current
electric power plants.























Argument 94
The following appeared in a memo from the human resources department of Rifco Computer Company to the company president.
"In order to prevent conflicts in the workplace, Rifco Computer Company should require all its
employees to attend workshops that teach the technique of active listening, a technique in
which people express feelings without assigning blame. This technique has clearly benefited
Terland Publishing Company: five years ago, two hundred recently hired Terland employees
volunteered to participate in a one-day active-listening workshop. Five years later, only five
percent of these employees had filed formal complaints with the human resources department,
whereas the company as a whole had a fifteen percent complaint rate during that period."
This memo's author concludes that to prevent workplace conflicts at Rifco Computer all
employees should attend active-listening workshops. To justify this conclusion the author
points out that five years ago 200 new workers at Terland Publishing volunteered for a one-day
active-listening workshop, and that since then only 5% percent of those volunteers have filed
formal complaints with Terland's human-resources department, compared to 15% of Terland's
overall work force. The argument is unconvincing for several reasons.
First of all, the author assumes too hastily that the workshop at Terland, rather than some
other phenomenon, was responsible for the comparatively low incidence of formal complaints
by the workshop volunteers. Perhaps people who volunteer for such workshops tend to have
better interpersonal skills to begin with, and are therefore less likely to find reason to complain
about coworkers in any event. Moreover, a one-day "active listening'' workshop is unlikely to
have a lasting impact; were the workshop held more recently I would be more willing to accept
the proposition that it was the reason for the low incidence of complaints among its attendees.
Secondly, even if the comparatively low incidence of complaints by Terland's workshop
attendees is attributable to the workshop, the memo's conclusion rests on the additional
assumption that the incidence of formal complaints is an accurate indicator of the level of
workplace conflict. Yet the incidence of formal complaints might be a function of some other
factor instead---such as an employee's tenure. New employees might be less prone than other
workers to file formal complaints--possibly for fear of losing their jobs during a probation period.
For that matter, perhaps most serious workplace conflicts calling for formal complaint come to
a head only after many years of tension between workers; if so, this would provide an equally
convincing explanation for the lower incidence of complaints among newer workers.
Thirdly, even if Terland's workshop volunteers did learn from the workshop to get along
better with coworkers, the author unfairly assumes that similar workshops WIU carry a similar
result at Rifco. Terland is an entirely different business than Rifco; accordingly, perhaps the
ways in which workers at Terland interrelate are unlike those at Rifco. Or perhaps people who
work in publishing are generally more irascible or mercurial than computer-industry workers.
For that matter, perhaps Rifco employees are insufficiently motivated to benefit from the
workshop--for whatever reason. In short, lacking evidence that Rifco employees match the
profile of the volunteers at Terland in terms of the likelihood that they will respond similarly to
similar workshops--the author's claim that the proposed workshops will prevent workplace
conflict at Rifco is dubious at best.
In sum, the recommendation depends on a series of poor assumptions and is therefore
unpersuasive. To strengthen it the author must consider and rule out all other possible reasons
for the relatively low incidence of complaints by Terland's workshop attendees. The author
must also show that the incidence of formal complaints is a fair measure of worker conflict.
Finally, the author must show that workers at Rifco are similar to the volunteers at Terland in
terms of their willingness and ability to respond favorably to the proposed workshops.























Argument 95
The following recommendation was made by the Human Resources Manager to the board of directors of the Fancy Toy Company.
"In the last three quarters of this year, under the
leadership of our president, Pat Salvo, our profits have fallen considerably. Thus, we should
ask for her resignation in return for a generous severance package. In Pat's place, we should
appoint Rosa Winnings. Rosa is currently president of Starlight Jewelry, a company whose
profits have increased dramatically over the past several years. Although we will have to pay
Rosa twice the salary that Pat has been receiving, it will be well worth it because we can soon
expect our profits to increase considerably."
In this memo a manager at Fancy Toy Company recommends replacing Pat Salvo, the
company's current president, with Rosa Winnings, who is currently president of Starlight
Jewelry. To support this recommendation the manager points out that Fancy's profits have
declined during the last three quarters under Pat's leadership, while Starlight's profits have
been increasing dramatically. The manager's argument is unconvincing for several reasons.
First, the manager's recommendation relies partly on the assumption that Pat was the cause
of Fancy Toy's declining profits. However, this need not be the case. Perhaps the toy business
is seasonal, and the coming quarter is always the most profitable one. Or perhaps the cost of
materials or labor have increased, and Pat has had no control over these increases. Without
taking into account such possibilities, the manager simply cannot reasonably conclude that Pat
is responsible for Fancy's declining profits, and that replacing Pat will therefore enhance
Fancy's profits.
Similarly, the manager's recommendation assumes that it is Rosa who has been primarily
responsible for Starlight's profitability. However, the manager provides no evidence to affirm
this assumption. It is entirely possible that all jewelry businesses have prospered recently,
regardless of the abilities of the managers. Or perhaps the costs of precious metals and other
materials have declined in recent years, thereby leading to increased profits for Starlight.
Moreover, perhaps Rosa has only served as president of Starlight for a short while, and it was
her predecessor who is to credit for Starlight's profitability. Without taking into account these
possibilities, the manager cannot defend the conclusion that it is Rosa who is responsible for
Starlight's increasing profitability.
Finally, the manager's recommendation to replace Pat with Rosa rests on the poor
assumption that the two businesses are sufficiently similar that Rosa's experience and skill in
one business will transfer to the other. Even if Starlight's increasing profitability is attributable to
Rosa's leadership, she might nevertheless be unsuccessful leading a toy company, depending
on how much experience in the toy business is required to successfully lead such a company.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the manager must
show that Pat, and not some other factor beyond Pat's control, is responsible for Fancy's
declining profits. Similarly, the manager must show that it is Rosa who is primarily responsible
for Starlight's profitability, and that Rosa's abilities will transfer to the toy business. In order to
better evaluate the argument, we would need more information about how long Pat and Rosa
have served as presidents of their respective companies, and what their long-term record is for
leading their respective companies to profitability.























Argument 96
The following is a letter to the editor of a news magazine.
"Clearly, the successful use of robots on missions to explore outer space in the past 20 years
demonstrates that robots could be increasingly used to perform factory work more effectively,
efficiently, and profitably than human factory workers. The use of robots in factories would offer
several advantages. First, robots never get sick, so absenteeism would be reduced. Second,
robots do not make mistakes, so factories would increase their output. Finally, the use of
robots would also improve the morale of factory workers, since factory work can be so boring
that many workers would be glad to shift to more interesting kinds of tasks."
This editorial concludes that using robots for factory work would improve factory efficiency.
To justify this conclusion the editorial's author cites the fact that robots have been used
effectively in many space missions. Also, the author claims that the use of robots in factories
would (1) reduce absenteeism because robots never get sick, (2) improve output because
robots do not make errors, and (3) improve factory-worker morale because these workers
could be reassigned to less boring jobs. However, the author's argument is problematic in
several critical respects.
To begin with, the argument depends on the hasty assumption that the kinds of tasks robots
perform in space are similar to the ones they would perform in factories, and that there are no
differences between the two environments that would render robots less effective in factory
jobs than in space missions. Perhaps the effectiveness of robots in space missions is due
largely to the weightless environment of space. Or perhaps the average space-mission robot
performs less work than a typical factory robot would be required to perform. In either case, the
fact that robots are effective in space would amount to scant support the author's argument.
As for the author's claim that the use of robots would decrease absenteeism, although
robots clearly do not get sick, in all likelihood factory robots would break down from time to
time which is tantamount to absenteeism. Without accounting for this likelihood the author
cannot rely on this claim to condude that the use of robots would improve overall factory
efficiency. Also questionable is the author's claim that the use of robots would increase factory
output because robots do not make errors. Unless the author can provide clear evidence that
human errors result in a lower rate of factory output, and not just a lower quality of product, I
cannot be convinced that using robots would in fact increase the rate of output.
Two final problems involve the author's claim that using robots would improve the morale of
factory workers, thereby improving factory effidency. First, the author provides no assurances
that if factory workers are reassigned to other types of jobs their morale would improve as a
result. Although the new jobs might be less boring, these jobs might pose other problems
which would adversely affect worker morale. Secondly, even if the morale of the workers
improves as a result of reassignment, overall factory efficiency will not necessarily improve as
a result. These workers might be ill-suited for their new jobs and thus be extremely ineffective
in them.
In sum, the editorial relies on a potentially weak analogy as well as on a series of
unwarranted claims. To strengthen the argument that the use of robots would improve factory
efficiency, the editorial's author must at the very least provide clear evidence that factory
robots would perform the same types of tasks, and just as well, as the tasks robots have
performed in space missions. To better assess the strength of each of the author's three
unwarranted claims, respectively, I would need to know: (1) the expected downtime, i.e.,
absenteeism--for factory robots: (2) the extent to which human error decreases the rate of
factory output; and (3) the extent to which human factory workers would be happy and
effective in the new jobs to which they would be assigned.























Argument 97
The following appeared in a memorandum to faculty from the academic vice president of Waymarsh University.
"So that we can better accomplish Waymarsh University's academic goals, we should adopt
the job-opportunity (job-op) program offered at Plateau Technical College and strongly
encourage all students at Waymarsh to participate in it. The success of the job-op program at
Plateau is evident: over the past two years, more than 75% of the freshmen at Plateau have
enrolled in the optional job-op program. Moreover, at Plateau, the grades of job-op students
are consistently higher than those of other students, 90% of the job-op students receive job
offers within a month after their graduation, and most former job-op students report much
success in their careers."
In this memo a Waymarsh University administrator recommends that in order to achieve its
academic goals Waymarsh should adopt the same "job-op" program currently offered at
Plateau Technical College. To support this recommendation, the administrator points out a
high enrollment rate in the program at Plateau, high academic grades among Plateau students
enrolled in the program compared to other Plateau students, and a high success rate among
new Plateau graduates in finding jobs. The administrator's argument is unconvincing for
several reasons.
First of all, the administrator does not inform us what Waymarsh's academic goals are. It is
entirely possible that these goals have nothing to do with enrollment in job opportunity
programs or in the job-placement rate for new graduates. Although Plateau's goals are likely to
depend on its job-placement rate, perhaps Waymarsh's primary goal is to prepare its students
for graduate-level study. Even if Waymarsh's goals involve job placement, there might be
alternative means of accomplishing those goals. In short, without identifying Waymarsh's goals
and ruling out other possible means of attaining them, the administrator cannot justifiably
conclude that Waymarsh should adopt the job-op program.
Secondly, the fact that a high percentage of Plateau students enroll in Plateau's job-op
program does not mean that a large portion of Waymarsh students will also enroll in the
program. Plateau students might be far more concerned about obtaining employment
immediately after graduation than Waymarsh students are. The fact that Plateau is a two-year
technical college while Waymarsh is a university supports this assertion.
Thirdly, the fact that Plateau students enrolled in the job-op program attain higher grades than
other Plateau students does not necessarily mean that the job-op program is responsible for
this phenomenon. Perhaps only the brighter, more competitive Plateau students enroll in the
job-op program in the first place. Without ruling out this possibility, the administrator cannot
convincingly conclude that Waymarsh students who enroll in the job-op program are more
likely to attain better grades or find jobs upon graduation. In fact, a job-op program might
actually thwart Waymarsh's efforts, by encouraging enrollees to quit school and take jobs for
which a four-year degree is not needed.
Finally, the administrator overlooks the possibility that the job-op program is oriented toward
the needs of students at technical schools. A job-op program that successfully places technical
students might not be as successful in placing graduates of four-year universities, because the
types of jobs the two groups of graduates typically seek and would qualify for are quite
different.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the administrator
must show that one of Waymarsh's academic goals is to place its new graduates in jobs. The
administrator must also show that this job-op program is equally successful in placing
university graduates as it is in placing technical-school graduates. To better evaluate the
argument we would need more information about the extent to which the job-opprogram is
actually responsible for the successful job placement rate among Plateau's graduates.























Argument 98
The following appeared in a memorandum from the new president of the Patriot car manufacturing company.
"In the past, the body styles of Patriot cars have been old-fashioned, and our cars have not
sold as well as have our competitors' cars. But now, since many regions in this country report
rapid increases in the numbers of newly licensed drivers, we should be able to increase our
share of the market by selling cars to this growing population. Thus, we should discontinue our
oldest models and concentrate instead on manufacturing sporty cars. We can also improve the
success of our marketing campaigns by switching our advertising to the Youth Advertising
agency, which has successfully promoted the country's leading soft drink."
In this memo the president of Patriot car manufacturing argues that in order to increase its
market share Patriot should (1) discontinue its older models, which look "old- fashioned" and
have not been selling well, (2) begin manufacturing sporty models, and (3) hire Youth
Advertising agency, which has successfully promoted the country's leading soft drink. To justify
this recommendation the president points out that many regions report a rapid increase in the
number of newly licensed drivers. However, this argument relies on several dubious
assumptions, and is therefore unpersuasive.
To begin with, the president's argument relies on certain unproven assumptions about the
reports of a sharp increase in the number of newly licensed drivers. First, the argument
assumes that the reports are accurate, and that these regions account for a statistically
significant portion of Patriot's potential buyers. Secondly, the president overlooks the
possibility that in other regions that number is actually declining, so that there is no net
increase at all.
Even assuming that the reports are accurate and the regions cited are representative of the
overall territory in which Patriot cars are marketed, the president concludes too hastily that
newly licensed drivers will tend to favor new cars over used ones, and to favor Patriot's sporty
new cars over other manufacturers' new vehicles. The president ignores the likelihood that the
vast majority of new drivers are teenagers who cannot afford new sports cars, or new cars of
any kind. Even teenagers who can afford new sports cars might prefer other manufacturers'
cars--perhaps due to Patriot's old-fashioned image. Lacking evidence that new drivers who
buy cars will tend to buy Patriot sports cars, the president cannot convince me that the
recommended course of action will increase Patriot's market share.
Finally, the fact that Youth has successfully promoted the country's leading soft drink
amounts to scant evidence that Youth would also be successful in promoting Patriot cars.
Marketers that are effective in one industry are not necessarily effective in another. Besides,
the president unfairly assumes that Patriot's current advertising agency is partly responsible
for Patriot's relatively small market share. Perhaps some other factor--such as poor
management, distribution, or pricing decisions--is the true reason for Patriot's market-share
problem. Moreover, perhaps Youth would be less effective than Patriot's current ad agency.
Thus switching to Youth will not necessarily improve Patriot's market share--and might even
result in a decline in that share.
In sum, the president's recommendation is weak. To strengthen it the president must show
that the reports are a reliable indicator of the overall change in the number of newly licensed
drivers. The president must also provide dear evidence--perhaps by way of a reliable
survey--that a sufficient percentage and number of new drivers who are able and willing to buy
new cars will choose Patriot's sports cars over other manufacturers' cars, so that Patriot's
overall market share will increase. To better assess the recommendation that Patriot switch to
Youth, I would need to know the extent to which Patriot's current ad strategy is responsible for
Patriot's market-share problems; then I would need to know Youth's experience and success
record in the car industry--relative to that of Patriot's current agency as well as other available
agencies.























Argument 99
The following appeared in a memorandum from the owner of Armchair Video, a chain of video rental stores.
"Because of declining profits, we must reduce operating expenses at Armchair Video's ten
video rental stores. Raising prices is not a good option, since we are famous for our special
bargains. Instead, we should reduce our operating hours. Last month our store in downtown
Marston reduced its hours by closing at 6:00 P.M. rather than 9:00 P.M. and reduced its overall
inventory by no longer stocking any film released more than two years ago. Since we have
received very few customer complaints about these new policies, we should now adopt them
at all other Armchair Video stores as our best strategies for improving profits."
In this memo the owner of Arrnchair Video concludes that in order to boost sagging profits
Armchair's stores should eliminate evening operating hours and should stock only movies that
are less than two years old. To support this conclusion the owner points out that since
Armchair's downtown Marston store implemented these changes, very few customers have
complained. The owner's argument relies on several unsubstantiated assumptions, and is
therefore unconvincing as it stands.
In the first place, implicit in the argument is the assumption that no other means of boosting
profits is available to Armchair. While the owner has explicitly ruled out the option of raising its
rental rates, the owner ignores other means, such as selling videos, or renting and selling
compact discs, candy, and so forth. Without considering such alternatives, the owner cannot
justifiably conclude that the proposed changes are the only ways Armchair can boost its
profits.
A second problem with the argument is that it assumes that the proposed changes would in
fact enhance profits. It is entirely possible that the lost revenue from reducing store hours
would outweigh the savings in reduced operating costs. Perhaps Armchair customers are
attracted to the stores' wide selection and Variety of movies, and that Armchair would lose their
patronage should it reduce its inventory. Moreover, common sense informs me that video
rental stores do most of their business during evening hours, and therefore that the proposed
action would act~:aily result in a further decline in profits.
Two additional problems involve the downtown Marston store. First, the owner impliciffy
assumes that the store has increased its profits as a result of eliminating evening operating
hours and stocking only newer movies. Yet the owner provides no evidence to support this
assumption. One cannot infer from the mere fact that the store's patrons have not complained
that the store's business, and in turn profits, have increased as a result of these changes.
A second problem with Marston is that the owner assumes this store is representative of
Armchair outlets generally. It is entirely possible that, due to its downtown location, the Marston
store attracts a daytime clientele more interested in new movies, whereas other oudets
depend on an evening clientele with different or more diverse tastes in movies. Or perhaps
downtown Marston lacks competing video stores or movie theaters, whereas Armchair's other
stores are located in areas with many competitors. Without accounting for such possibilities,
the owner cannot convince me that the profits of other Armchair oudets would increase by
following Marston's example.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the owner must
provide strong evidence that the cost savings of the proposed course of action would outweigh
any loss in revenue, and that no other viable means of boosting its profits is available to
Axmchak. To better evaluate the argument we would need information enabling us to compare
the Marston store's clientele and competition with that of other Armchair stores. We would also
need more information about Marston's profitability before and after it implemented the new
policies.























Argument 100
"In each city in the region of Treehaven, the majority of the money spent on government-run
public school education comes from taxes that each city government collects. The region's
cities differ, however, in the value they place on public education. For example, Parson City
typically budgets twice as much money per year as Blue City does for its public schools---even
though both cities have about the same number of residents. It seems clear, therefore, that
Parson City residents care more about public school education than do Blue City residents."
This argument concludes that Parson City residents value public-school education more
highly than Blue City residents do. To justify this conclusion the argument points out that in
both cities the majority of funds for public schools comes from taxes, and that Blue City
budgets only half as much money per year for its public schools as Parson City, even though
the population in both cities is about the same. The argument relies on a series of
unsubstantiated assumptions, which considered together render the argument wholly
unconvincing.
One such assumption is that the total budget for the two cities is about the same. It is
entirely possible that Blue City's total budget is no more than half that of Parson City. If so, then
the fact that Blue City budgets only half as much as Parson City for its public schools would
suggest at least the same degree of care about public-school education among Blue City's
residents as among Parson City's residents.
Even if Parson City devotes a greater percentage of its budget each year for its schools, the
argument relies on the additional assumption that this percentage is a reliable indicator of the
value a city's residents place on public-school education. Yet it is entirely possible, for example,
that Blue City's schools are already well funded, or that Blue City has some other, extremely
urgent problem which requires additional funding despite a high level of concern among its
residents about its public schools. Absent evidence that the two city's various needs are similar,
any comparison between the level of concern about public schools among residents in the two
dries based simply on funds spent for public schools is dubious at best.
A third assumption upon which the argument rests is that the percentage of residents who
attend public schools is about the same in both cities. The argument indicates only that the
total population of the two dries is about the same. If a comparatively small percentage of Blue
City residents attend public schools, then the comparatively small amount of money Blue City
devotes to those schools might be well justified despite an equal level of concern about the
quality of public-school education among residents in the two dries.
Finally, although the argument states that in both cities "the majority" of money spent on
public schools comes from taxes, perhaps the actual percentage is smaller in Blue City than in
Parson City, and other such funds come from residents' donations, earmarked for public
education. Compliance with tax laws is scant evidence of taxpayer support of pub lic-school
education, while voluntary giving is strong evidence. Thus it is possible that Blue City residents
donate more money per capita for public-school education than Parson City residents do. If so,
this fact would seriously weaken the argument that Blue City residents place a comparatively
low value on public-school education.
In sum, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen it the argument's proponent
must provide clear evidence that the percentage of the budget allotted to public
schools, as well as the percentage of money spent on public schools and derived from taxes,
is about the same in both dries. To better assess the argument I would need to compare the
neediness of Blue City's public schools with that of Parson's public schools. I would also need
more information about other urgent financial needs in each city, and about the other sources
of the money applied toward public-school education in each city.



























Argument 101
The following appeared in a letter to the Grandview City Council from a local business leader.
"During last year's severe drought, when the water supply in the Grandview city reservoir fell to
an extremely low level, the city council imposed much more rigid water-rationing rules. But just
after these rules were imposed, industrial growth in the area declined. This clearly shows that
the new rationing rules have hurt industry in Grandview. Therefore, to promote the health of
the local economy, the city council should now stop water rationing."
In this letter a Grandview City business leader concludes that in order to promote economic
health the city must abolish the water-rationing rules it implemented during last year's drought.
To support this conclusion the letter's author points out that since the city implemented these
rules industrial growth in the area has declined. However, this argument contains several
logical problems, which render it unconvincing as it stands.
First of all, the argument relies on two threshold assumptions: that people who use the city's
water have complied with the rules, and that area industry is subject to the rules in the first
place. Yet the author supplies no evidence to substantiate either assumption. In other words, if
area industries have not in fact been rationing water, the author's condusion that water
rationing is a contributing cause of the recent decline in industry growth would be indefensible.
A second problem with the argument is that it overlooks other possible explanations for the
decline in industry growth. Perhaps the decline is the result of a general economic recession
that has also impacted businesses in areas not subject to water rationing. Or perhaps local or
state regulations unrelated to water rationing are instead responsible for the slowdown.
Without accounting for such possibilities, the author cannot justify the conclusion that the
water rationing is the cause of the slowdown.
A third problem with the argument is that it unjustifiably assumes that stopping water rationing
would help reverse the decline in industry growth. It is entirely possible that this course of
action would actually exacerbate the decline. Specifically, perhaps the lack of water has been
the primary factor in the slowdown. If so, and if the rationing stops, water might become even
more scarce depending on current drought conditions, in which case the slowdown would
worsen.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the business
leader must provide strong evidence that no other factors were responsible for the slow down
in industry growth, and that industry has complied with the rules in the first place. Finally, to
better evaluate the argument we would need more information about current water availability
in the area, so that we can assess how stopping water rationing would affect this availability.























Argument 102
The following appeared in a magazine article about planning for retirement.
"Because of its spectacular natural beauty and consistent climate, Clearview should be a top
choice for anyone seeking a place to retire. As a bonus, housing costs in Clearview have fallen
significantly during the past year, and real estate taxes remain lower than those in neighboring
towns. Nevertheless, Clearview's mayor promises many new programs to improve schools,
streets, and public services. Retirees in Clearview can also expect excellent health care as
they grow older, since the number of physicians in the area is far greater than the national
average."
This artide argues that anyone seeking a place to retire should choose Clearview. To support
this argument the article cites Clearview's consistent climate and natural beauty; it's falling
housing costs; its low property taxes compared to nearby towns; and the mayor's promise to
improve schools, streets, and services. The article also claims that retirees can expect
excellent health care because the number of physicians in Clearview greatly exceeds the
national average. This argument is flawed in several critical respects.
To begin with, although consistent climate and natural beauty might be attractive to many
retirees, these features are probably not important to all retirees. For many retirees it is
probably more important to live near relatives, or even to enjoy changing seasons. Thus I
cannot accept the author's sweeping recommendation for all retirees on this basis.
Also, Clearview's declining housing costs do not necessarily make Clearview the best place
to retire for two reasons. First, despite the decline Clearview's housing costs might be high
compared to housing costs in other cities. Secondly, for wealthier retirees housing costs are
not likely to be a factor in choosing a place to retire. Thus the mere fact that housing costs
have been in decline lends scant support to the recommendation.
The article's reliance on Clearview's property-tax rates is also problematic in two respects.
First, retirees obviously have innumerable choices about where to retire besides Clear view
and nearby towns. Secondly, for retirees who are well-off financially property taxes are not
likely to be an important concern in choosing a place to retire. Thus it is unfair to infer from
Clearview's property-tax rates that retirees would prefer Clearview.
Yet another problem with the argument involves the mayor's promises. In light of Clearview's
low property-tax rates, whether the mayor can follow through on those promises is highly
questionable. Absent any explanation of how the city can spend more money in the areas cited
without raising property taxes, I simply cannot accept the editorial's recommendation on the
basis of those promises. Besides, even if the city makes the improvements promised, those
improvements--particular the ones to schools--would not necessarily be important to retirees.
Finally, although the number of physicians in Clearview is relatively high, the per capita
number might be relatively low. Moreover, it would be fairer to compare this per capita number
with the per capita number for other attractive retirement towns--rather than the national
average. After all, retirees are likely to place a relatively heavy burden on health-care
resources. Besides, the article provides no assurances that the number of physicians in
Clearview will remain high in the foreseeable future.
In conclusion, the recommendation is poorly supported. To strengthen it the author must
convince me--perhaps by way of a reliable survey--that the key features that the vast majority
of retirees look for in choosing a place to live are consistent climate, natural beauty, and low
housing costs. The author must also provide better evidence that Clear view's property taxes
are lower than the those of cities in other areas. The author must also explain how the city can
make its promised improvements without raising property taxes. Finally, to better assess the
argument I would need to now how the per capita number of physicians in Clearview would
compare to the national average in the future.


























Argument 103
The following appeared in a brochure promoting the purchase of local franchises for a national chain of gyms.
"Now is the time to invest in a Power-Lift Gym franchise so that you can profit from opening
one of our gyms in your town. Consider the current trends: Power-Lift Gyms are already
popular among customers in 500 locations, and national surveys indicate increasing concern
with weight loss and physical fitness. Furthermore, last year's sales of books and magazines
on personal health totaled more than $50 million, and purchases of home exercise equipment
almost doubled. Investing now in a Power-Lift Gym franchise will guarantee a quick profit."
This brochure for Power-Lift Gym da/ms that by investing in a Power-Lift franchise an
investor will earn a quick profit. To support this claim the brochure cites a variety of statistics
about the current popularity of physical fitness and of Power-Lift Gyms in particular. However,
careful scrutiny of this evidence reveals that it lends no credible support to the claim.
One problem with the brochure's claim involves its reliance on the bare fact that revenue
from last year's sales of health books and magazines totaled $50 million. This statistic in itself
proves nothing. Health magazines do not all focus on weightlifting or even physical fitness; it is
possible that very few sales were of those that do. Besides, it is entirely possible that in
previous years total sales were even higher and that sales are actually declining. Either
scenario, if true, would serve to weaken the brochure's claim rather than support it.
Another problem with brochure's claim involves the fact that more and more consumers are
purchasing home gyms. It is entirely possible that consumers are using home gyms as a
substitute for commercial gyms, and that the number of Power-Lift memberships will decline as
a result. Without ruling out this possibility, the brochure cannot convince me that a new
Power-Lift franchise would be profitable.
A third problem with the brochure's claim involves its reliance on the fact that 500 Power-Lift
franchises are now in existence. It is entirely possible that the market has become saturated,
and that additional Power-Lift gyms will not be as successful as current ones. Moreover, it is
possible that the number of competing gyms has also increased in tandem with the general
interest in health and fitness. Without addressing this supply-and-demand issue, the brochure
cannot justify its conclusion that a new Power-Lift fran- chise would be a sound investment.
In conclusion, the brochure is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen its daim that a new
Power-Lift franchise would be profitable, the brochure should provide stronger evidence that
the general interest in physical fitness, and weightlifting in particular, will continue unabated in
the foreseeable furore. The brochure must also provide evidence that home gyms are not
serving as substitutes for commercial gyms. Finally, to better evaluate the argument we would
need more information about the extent to which the fitness-gym market has become
saturated, not only by Power-Lift franchises but by com peting gyms as well.























Argument 104
The following appeared in a memorandum from the president of Hyper-Go Toy Company.
"Last year, sales of our Fierce Fighter toy airplane declined sharply, even though the toy had
been a top seller for three years. Our customer surveys show that parents are now more
worried about youthful violence and are concerned about better education for their children.
Therefore, to maintain profits we should discontinue all our action toys and focus exclusively
on a new line of educational toys. Several other toy companies have already begun marketing
educational toys and report sales increases last year of 200 percent. And since the average
family income is growing, sales of new Hyper-Go toys should also increase."
In this memo the president of Hyper-Go Toy Company (HG) argues that in order to maintain
profitability the company should discontinue its complete line of action toys and focus
exclusively on a new line of educational toys. To support this argument the president cites the
dramatic decline in sales of HG's Fierce Fighter (FF) toy airplane, which during the previous
three years had been a top seller, and an HG customer survey indicating increasing concern
among parents about youth violence and for improving their children's education. The
president also points out that several other toy companies have begun marketing educational
toys and report a 200% increase in overall sales, and that the average family income is
growing. The president's argument relies on several doubtful assumptions and is therefore
unpersuasive.
First, the president's assumption that parental concern about youth violence is the cause of
declining FF sales might be unwarranted. The decline might have been caused by one or more
other factors--such as supply or distribution problems, new competing products from other toy
companies, or a waning of interest in FF among children. Without ruling out these and other
possible reasons for the decline, the president's argument seems ill-conceived.
Secondly, the results of HG's customer survey are not necessarily representative of the
overall population of toy-buying parents. Perhaps HG's current customers are more concerned
about youth violence and education than most parents. If so, then the president has
overlooked the possibility that a substantial portion of HG's target market would not react
favorably to the proposed changes.
Thirdly, perhaps sales of HG's other action toys remained stable or even increased last year.
In fact, it is entirely possible that some of riG's other toys are becoming very popular and will
soon replace FF as top sellers. If so, then discontinuing the entire line would be ill-advised
indeed.
Fourth, assuming the toy companies that saw a 200% sales increase last year are
statistically representative of toy companies in general, that increase might be due to
action-toy sales rather than to educational-toy sales. If so, then the statistic would amount to
scant support for the proposed course of action.
Finally, the mere fact that average family income is growing provides little assurance that the
proposed changes would increase HG's sales. Perhaps the average income of families without
young children is growing, but for families with young children who buy toys it is shrinking. For
that matter, perhaps average family expenses are also growing, so that families have even
less discretionary income than before. Without ruling out these possibilities, the president
cannot justify the proposed changes on the basis of the growth of average family income.
In sum, the president's argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the president
must show that parents in general, not just HG customers, are concerned about youth violence
and education, and that these concerns are the reason for declining FF sales. To better assess
the argument I would need more information about sales trends of HG's other action toys, and
about the types of toys that have contributed to the 200% increase in sales for the other toy
companies.























Argument 105
The following appeared in a memorandum from a vice president of the Megamart department store chain.
"For the third year in a row, the average household income in our country has risen significantly.
That prosperity means that families are likely to be spending more time and money on leisure
activities. Megamart stores should therefore concentrate on enlarging and promoting its line of
products typically used in leisure activities: athletic and outdoor equipment, televisions,
gourmet cooking equipment, and luggage and travel accessories."
In this memo the vice president of Megamart concludes that Megamart should expand its
line of products related to leisure activities. To support this claim the memo points out that for
three years in a row the average household income nationwide has risen. However, close
inspection of the argument reveals several logical problems, which render it unconvincing as it
stands.
First of all, the claim relies on two threshold assumptions about rising income. One is that
this trend will continue in the future; if it does not then the proposed course of action is unlikely
to result in increased profits for Megamart. The other threshold assumption is that the cost of
living is not also increasing at least at a commensurate rate. Yet it is entirely possible that living
costs have risen to meet or even exceed the rise in income.
If so, Megamart would in all likelihood sell fewer leisure products than otherwise. Even
assuming that discretionary income is rising and will continue to rise, the argument relies on
the additional assumption that people will spend this discretionary income on leisure products.
However, the memo provides no evidence to substantiate this assumption. Perhaps people
are increasing their savings rather than spending their additional income. If so, this fact would
significantly undermine the vice president's claim that demand for leisure products is
increasing, and therefore that Megamart would benefit by offering more such products.
Yet another problem with the argument involves the reason why average income has risen in
the first place. It is entirely possible that income has risen because people have been working
more hours. If so, then in all likelihood people have less leisure time, in which case they will not
spend more money on leisure products--simply because they have less time for leisure
pursuits. Without addressing this issue, the vice president cannot convince me that Megamart
should expand itsline of leisure products.
In conclusion, the vice president's argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the
vice president must provide strong evidence that discretionary income is rising and will
continue to rise. The vice president must also show that people will in fact choose to spend this
income on leisure products, and that people have enough free time for leisure pursuits in the
first place.


























Argument 104
The following appeared in an article in a magazine for writers.
"A recent study showed that in describing a typical day's conversation, people make an
average of 23 references to watching television and only 1 reference to reading fiction. This
result suggests that, compared with the television industry, the publishing and bookselling
industries are likely to decline in profitability. Therefore, people who wish to have careers as
writers should acquire training and experience in writing for television rather than for print
media."
This article cites a recent study showing that during a typical day people make an average of
23 references to watching television but only one reference to reading fiction. From these
statistics the author reasons that the television industry must be far more profitable than the
book-publishing industry, then concludes that people seeking careers in writing should acquire
training and experience in television writing. This argument is flawed in several critical
respects.
First of all, the article's author has not shown the study upon which the argument depends to
be statistically reliable. The people studied must be representative of the overall population of
people who buy books and watch television; otherwise the author cannot draw any firm
conclusions about the comparative profitability of the television and book publishing industries
based on the study's results.
Secondly, the author's argument depends on the assumption that the frequency with which a
person refers in conversation to television, or to fiction books, is a good indication of how much
television a person watches, or how many fiction books a person reads. Yet this is not
necessarily the case. Perhaps people tend to refer many times in daily conversation to the
same television show. If so, then the statistics cited would overstate the amount of television
people watch compared to the number of fiction books they read.
Thirdly, even if the statistics cited accurately reflect the amount of television people watch
compared to the number of fiction books they read, it would be hasty to infer based merely on
this fact that the television industry is more profitable than the book-publishing industry. To
begin with, the study's results excluded any data about nonfiction books--a category that might
very well constitute book publishers' main profit source. Moreover, the author has not shown
any correlation, let alone a cause-and-effect relationship, between the number of hours a
person spends watching television and that industry's profits. In any event, lacking financial
statistics about the profitability of the two industries the editorial's author cannot convince me
that writers should follow the author's recommendation.
Finally, even assuming that the television industry is more profitable than the
book-publishing industry, the author's implicit claim that television writers enjoy more secure
and lucrative careers than book writers is without support. It is entirely possible that television
writers are paid comparatively low wages; in fact, low writer compensation might partially
explain why the television industry is relatively profitable. Without better evidence that
television writers are better off then book writers it might be folly to follow the author's
recommendation.
In sum, the argument relies on several poor assumptions and is therefore unconvincing as it
stands. To strengthen it the article's author must provide dear evidence that the study's
subjects reflect the overall population, and that their conversational habits accu rately reflect
how much television they watch compared to how many books they read. The author must
also show that the disparity between the two contributes to far greater financial rewards for the
television industry, as well as for its writers, than for the book publishing industry and its
writers.























Argument 107
The following article appeared in a recent issue of a college newspaper.
"Among all students who graduated from Hooper University over the past five years, more
physical science majors than social science majors found permanent jobs within a year of
graduation. In a survey of recent Hooper University graduates, most physical science majors
said they believed that the prestige of Hooper University's physical science programs helped
them significantly in finding a job. In contrast, social science majors who found permanent
employment attributed their success to their own personal initiative. Therefore, to ensure that
social science majors find permanent jobs, Hooper University should offer additional social
science courses and hire several new faculty members who already have national reputations
in the social sciences."
This article concludes that in order to help its new social-science graduates find permanent
jobs Hooper University should enhance its reputation in this field by adding courses and hiring
eminent faculty. To support this claim the letter points out that more physical science than
social-science students find permanent jobs within a year after graduation. The letter also cites
a survey in which the former group of graduates attributed their job finding success to the
prestige of Hooper's physical science department, while the latter group attributed their
job-finding success to their own initiative. However, careful scrutiny of the argument reveals
various statistical and other logical problems, which render it unconvincing.
To begin with, the survey that the argument cites is potentially problematic in three respects.
First, we are not informed whether the survey's respondents were representativeof the overall
population of recent Hooper graduates in these two fields. The smaller the sample, the greater
the possibility for biased results, and the less reliable the survey. Second, the survey reflects
the graduates' subjective "beliefs" about why they obtained jobs; yet it is entirely possible
these beliefs are not in accord with the true reason why they obtained jobs. Third, we are
informed that the survey involved "recent" Hooper graduates; however, if the only graduates
surveyed were those from last year's class, then the survey results would be less reliable than
if the survey embraced a wider range of graduating classes. The smaller the range the less
reliable any general conclusions drawn from the survey.
Even assuming the statistics that the letter cites are reliable, the letter's daim that the
proposed course of action will achieve its intended result assumes a sufficient job market for
social-science graduates. However, it is entirely possible that the number of jobs for
physical-science graduates greatly exceeds the number of jobs for social-science graduates,
and that this is the reason for the disparity m job-finding success between the two groups. In
fact, real-world observation suggests that this is a reasonable explanation for the disparity.
Moreover, the letter fails to account for the possibility that the latter group of graduates are less
likely than the former group to be interested in immediate employment--electing instead to
pursue graduate-level study. Without accounting for these possibilities, the letter's author
cannot justifiably conclude that the proposed course of action will boost the employment rate
of new social-science graduates.
A third problem with the argument is that it unfairly infers that the proposed course of action
is the only means of achieving the desired result. The letter's author overlooks other possible
means of ensuring that social-science students find immediate employment--such as co-op
programs, job seminars, and so forth. Without ruling out alternative means of achieving the
same goal, the author cannot convince me that the proposed course of action is needed.
In conclusion, as it stands the argument is unconvincing. To strengthen it the author must
provide strong evidence that the survey's respondents were statistically representative of all
recent Hooper graduates in these two fields of study. The author must also rule out all other
possible explanations for the disparity between job-finding success between the two groups of
Hooper graduates. Finally, to better evaluate the argument I would need more information
about the portion of graduates in each field pursuing immediate employment, and what
alternative means are available to help ensure that Hooper's new social-science graduates
find permanent employment.























Argument 108
The following appeared in a corporate planning memo at ABC Cereal Company, the makers of Better Bran cereal.
"Sales of Better Bran have declined in recent years, for reasons that management has now
identified. First, Better Bran is a cereal with high sugar content, and recent research studies
have found that most consumers say they are concerned about the amount of sugar added to
their breakfast cereal. Second, the price of Better Bran has increased by 5% in each of the last
three years. Therefore, to increase our company's profits we need to reduce the amount of
sugar in Better Bran and lower Better Bran's price."
This ABC Cereal Company memo concludes that to increase its profitability ABC must lower
both the sugar content and price of its Better Bran (BB) cereal. To justify this conclusion the
memo cites the fact that sales of BB have declined in recent years. The memo attributes this
decline to a concern among most consumers about the amount of sugar in their cereals, and to
the 5% increase in the price of BB during each of the last three years. The memo is
unconvincing for several reasons.
First, the mere fact that most consumers are concerned about sugar in cereal amounts to
scant evidence that the decline in BB sales is due to that concern. The level of concern, or the
amount of sugar in BB, might not be sufficiently high to cause consumers to stop buying BB
cereal on either basis. Moreover, unless the level of concern has grown during recent years I
cannot take seriously the claim that declining BB sales in recent years is due to that
concern--rather than to some other event or trend.
Secondly, assuming that the 5% price increases have contributed to the decline in BB sales,
it would be premature to conclude that profits from BB sales have also declined as a result.
Perhaps the additional revenue from the price increases more than offset the decline in
revenue due to the diminishing number of units sold. Thus ABC cannot convince me on the
basis of the price increases and the sales decline that lowering BB's price would serve to
improve ABC's overall profitability.
Thirdly, the memo's recommendation rests on the dubious assumption that the proposed
actions are the only two means of increasing ABC's overall profitability. In all likelihood, ABC's
profits are a function not only of how many boxes of BB it sells but also of its costs and its
revenue from other products. Perhaps ABC can improve its profits by other means--such as
expanding its cereal Line, marketing BB to health-conscious consumers and raising the price
of BB, or cutting costs in other areas. For that matter, if other cereal companies raise their
prices, consumers might begin to consider BB a bargain at its current price--or perhaps even
at a somewhat higher price. In short, since the memo has not ruled out all other possible
scenarios that might serve to improve ABC's overall profitability I simply cannot take the
memo's recommendation seriously.
Finally, even in the unlikely event that one of the two proposed changes is necessary to
increase ABC's overall profitability, the memo's assertion that both changes are necessary
might nevertheless be unwarranted. Perhaps only one of the two changes will suffice. Since
the memo ignores this possibility the strength of its recommendation remains questionable at
best.
In sum, ABC might be ill-advised to follow the memo's advice. To strengthen the argument
that ABC must lower BB's price and sugar content to improve profitability, ABC's planners must
provide clear evidence that consumer concern about sugar in cereals is the primary reason for
declining BB sales, and that this decline has diminished BB's profitability. To better assess
ABC's claim that the proposed course of action is necessary to improve ABC's profitability, I
would need to know what other alternatives, if any, are available to ABC for cutting costs and
for increasing revenue.























Argument 109
The following appeared as part of a letter to the editor of a local newspaper.
"During her three years in office, Governor Riedeburg has shown herself to be a worthy leader.
Since she took office, crime has decreased, the number of jobs created per year has doubled,
and the number of people choosing to live in our state has increased. These trends are likely
to continue if she is reelected. In addition, Ms. Riedeburg has promised to take steps to keep
big companies here, thereby providing jobs for any new residents. Anyone who looks at Ms.
Riedeburg's record can tell that she is the best-qualified candidate for governor."
This letter concludes that Governor Riedeburg is the best-qualified candidate for the job of
state governor. To justify this conclusion the letter points out various statewide trends since the
governor was elected, and the fact that she has promised to keep big companies in the state,
thereby providing jobs for any new residents. However, close scrutiny of the argument reveals
various logical problems, which render it unconvincing.
One problem with the argument is that the letter's author might be assigning a false cause to
these statewide trends. The author provides no evidence that Riedeburg's policies and actions
as governor were indeed the reason for these developments. Without such evidence, it is
equally possible that other factors are instead responsible for the trends. For instance, perhaps
the crime rate has declined due to legislative or judicial action over which Riedeburg had no
control. Perhaps the rise in the state's population is the result of sociological trends that have
nothing to do with Riedeburg's policies as governor. Or perhaps people are moving to the state
for other reasons, such as the state's climate. Moreover, the argument assumes that an
increase in population is a positive development in the first place; yet it is entirely possible that
the state's residents properly view this trend as a negative one. If so, and if Riedeburg's
policies have contributed to this trend, then the author cannot reasonably conclude based on
this evidence that Riedeburg is the best-qualified candidate.
Another problem with the argument involves Riedeburg's promise to keep big compariles in
the state, thereby providing jobs for any new residents. Assuming that Riedeburg keeps her
promise in the first place, the author provides no evidence that these employers would be
either willing or able to hire new residents. Perhaps these employers plan to curtail new hiring
in any event; or perhaps they plan to hire new employees only among current state residents.
Moreover, whether these employers are able to hire new employees depends on a variety of
extrinsic economic factors over which Riedeburg might have no control. Without accounting for
these possibilities, the author cannot rely on Riedeburg's promise to conclude that she is the
best-qualified candidate for the job of state governor.
Finally, the author's conclusion that Riedeburg is "the best-qualified candidate" raises two
problems in itself. First, regardless of Riedeburg's record as governor it is entirely possible that
one or more other candidates are actually better qualified. Second, the letter fails to
adequately define what makes a candidate for state governor qualified. Without indicating
what the ideal qualifications would be and ruling out the possibility that an other candidate
better meets these qualifications, the author cannot make a convincing case that Riedeburg is
the best-qualified candidate.
In conclusion, the argument is unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
provide clear evidence that it was Riedeburg who was responsible for the currents trends, and
that the current population trend is desirable in the first place. The author must also show that
the state's major employers would be willing and able to hire new residents in the future.
Finally, to better evaluate the argument we would need more information about what defines
an ideal governor and how well other candidates meet that definition.























Argument 110
The following appeared as part of a memo from the manager of an automobile manufacturing company.
"Because the demand for our automobiles is expected to increase dramatically, we need to
open a new manufacturing plant as soon as possible in order to continue to thrive. Our
marketing projections indicate that 80 million people will want to buy our automobiles, yet our
existing plant can only produce 40 million automobiles. The new plant can be opened on a
part-time basis, with workers from our existing site rotating responsibilities, until an operational
staff can be trained. A major airplane manufacturer was extremely successful using this
part-time rotating strategy when it opened its new plant five years ago."
In this memo the manager of a car manufacturing company argues that the company must
add a second plant in order to continue to thrive. To support this argument the manager points
out that its existing plant can only produce 40 million cars, but that according to company
projections 80 million people will want to buy the company's cars. The manager claims that the
company can achieve its objective by operating the new plant on a part-time basis using
workers from the existing plant on a rotational basis. To support this claim the manager points
out that a certain airplane manufacturing company employed this strategy successfully five
years ago. The manager's argument is problematic in several critical respects.
First of all, the manager assumes that no course of action other than the proposed one will
ensure that the company continues to thrive; yet the manager fails to substantiate this
assumption. Since demand is expected to be very high, perhaps the company can continue to
thrive simply by raising the price of its cars. For that matter, perhaps the company can continue
to thrive if it makes no changes at all. Without accounting for either possibility the manager
cannot convince me that building a second plant is necessary.
Secondly, even if building a second plant is necessary for the company to continue to thrive,
in itself this course of action might not suffice. After all, how can the manager reasonably
expect that a second plant will produce as many cars as the existing one if it operates on only
a part-time basis? And if the new plant borrows labor from the existing plant then production at
the existing plant might decline. Thus unless the manager can convince me that the new plant
will be far more efficient than the current plant I do not see any way that operating a new plant
on a part-time basis can double the company's production.
Finally, the mere fact that one certain airplane manufacturer adopted a similar plan with
some success is scant evidence that this car company will succeed ifit follows the manager's
plan. The memo provides no information about how many airplanes the airplane manufacturer
produced. Nor does the memo identify what constituted "success" for the airplane
manufacturer. Perhaps that company considered itself successful by producing only an
additional 10% more airplanes, or by merely managing to avoid bankruptcy. In short, as it
stands the anecdotal evidence about the airplane company is far too vague to lend meaningful
support to the manager's argument.
In sum, the manager's plan seems ill-conceived. To strengthen the argument that the
company must add a second plant to continue to thrive, the manager must at the very least
convince me that the company has no alternative means of achieving this objective. The
manager should also provide evidence that operating a new plant on only a part-time basis
would suffice to double production--perhaps by showing that the new plant would employ
newer, more efficient equipment than the existing plant. To better assess the argument it would
be useful to know what constituted "success" for the airplane manufacturer and, more
specifically, the percentage by which that company increased production as a result of adding
a second plant.























Argument 111
The following appeared as an editorial in a local newspaper.
"In order to attract visitors to Central Plaza downtown and to return the plaza to its former glory,
the city should prohibit skateboarding there and instead allow skateboarders to use an area in
Monroe Park. At Central Plaza, skateboard users are about the only people one sees now, and
litter and defaced property have made the plaza unattractive. In a recent survey of downtown
merchants, the majority supported a prohibition on skateboarding in the plaza. Clearly,
banning skateboarding in Central Plaza will make the area a place where people can
congregate for fun or for relaxation."
This editorial concludes that the city should ban skateboarding from its downtown Central
Plaza in order to attract visitors to that area, to return the area to its "former glory," and to make
it "a place where people can congregate for fun and relaxation." To justify this conclusion the
editorial points out that skateboarders are nearly the only people one sees anymore at Central
Plaza, and that the Plaza is littered and its property defaced. The editorial also points out that
the majority of downtown merchants support the skate boarding ban. This argument is flawed
in several critical respects.
First, the editorial's author falsely assumes that a ban on skateboarding is both necessary
and sufficient to achieve the three stated objectives. Perhaps the city can achieve those
objectives by other means as well--for example, by creating a new mall that incorporates an
attractive new skateboard park. Even if banning skateboarders altogether is necessary to meet
the city's goals, the author has not shown that this action by itself would suffice. Assuming that
the Plaza's reputation is now tarnished, restoring that reputation and, in turn, enticing people
back to the Plaza might require additional measures--such as removing litter and graffiti,
promoting the Plaza to the public, or enticing popular restaurant or retail chains to the Plaza.
Secondly, the editorial assumes too hastily that the Plaza's decline is attributable to the
skateboarders--rather than to some other phenomenon. Perhaps the Plaza's primary appeal in
its glory days had to do with particular shops or eateries, which were eventually replaced by
less appealing ones. Or perhaps the crime rate in surrounding areas has risen dramatically, for
reasons unrelated to the skateboarders' presence at the Plaza. Without ruling out these and
other alternative explanations for the Plaza's decline, the editorial's author cannot convince me
that a skateboard ban would reverse that decline.
Thirdly, the editorial's author might be confusing cause with effect--by assuming that the
skateboarders caused the abandonment of the Plaza, rather than vice versa. It is entirely
possible that skateboarders did not frequent the Plaza until it was largely abandoned--and
because it had been abandoned. In fact this scenario makes good sense, since skateboarding
is most enjoyable where there are few pedestrians or motorists to get in the way.
Fourth, it is unreasonable to infer from the mere fact that most merchants favor the ban that
the ban would be effective in achieving the city's objectives. Admittedly, perhaps these
merchants would be more likely to help dean up the Plaza area and promote their businesses
were the city to act in accordance with their preference. Yet lacking any supporting evidence
the author cannot convince me of this. Thus the survey amounts to scant evidence at best that
the proposed ban would carry the intended result.
Finally, the author recommends a course of action that might actually defeat the city's
objective of providing a fun and relaxing place for people to congregate. In my experience
skateboarding contributes to an atmosphere of fun and relaxation, for adults and children alike,
more so than many other types of ambiance. Without considering that continuing to allow
skateboarding--or even encouraging this activity--might achieve the city's goal more effectively
than banning the activity, the author cannot convincingly conclude that the ban would be in the
city's best interests.
In sum, the argument is a specious one. To strengthen it, the editorial's author must provide
dear evidence that skateboarding, and not some other factor, is responsible for the conditions
marking the Plaza's decline. The author must also convince me that no alternative means of
restoring the Plaza are available to the city, and that the proposed ban by itself would suffice to
attract tourists and restore the Plaza to its former glory. Finally, to better assess the argument it
would be useful to know the circumstances under which the downtown merchants would be
willing to help the city achieve its objectives.























Argument 112
The following appeared in a newsletter from a political organization.
"In order to promote economic growth in the city, city residents should vote 'yes' on the state
government's proposal to build a new expressway linking the outlying suburbs directly to the
city center. A direct link to the city center will enable downtown businesses to receive deliveries
more frequently, so that downtown retailers will no longer run out of stock and city
manufacturers will not be affected by shortages of materials. Booming businesses will attract
qualified workers from all over the state, workers who will be able to take advantage of the new
expressway to commute to work in our city. In addition to these advantages, hundreds of
workers will be employed to build the expressway, further stimulating the local economy!"
In this newsletter the author concludes that, in order to promote the economic health of the
city's downtown area, voters should approve the construction of an expressway linking
downtown to outlying suburbs. To support this conclusion the author claims that the
expressway would alleviate shortages of stock and materials among downtown businesses
and manufacturers, and would attract workers from elsewhere in the state. However, the
argument relies on a series of unsubstantiated assumptions, which render it unconvincing.
The first problem with the argument involves the author's dairn that the expressway would
help prevent downtown merchants and manufacturers from experiencing shortages in stock
and materials. This claim depends on three assumptions. One assumption is that such a
problem exists in the first place. A second assumption is that the absence of an expressway is
the cause of such shortages; yet common sense tells me that the availability of these
commodities is probably the primary such factor. A third assumption is that stock and materials
would be delivered primarily via the expressway. Yet it is entirely possible that these
commodities are delivered directly to the downtown area by other means, such as rail or air
transport. Without substantiating these assumptions the author cannot justifiably conclude that
the expressway would help prevent shortages of stock and materials.
Another problem with the argument involves the author's dual claim that because of the new
expressway workers from elsewhere in the state will be lured to work in this city's downtown
area and at the same time will choose to live in the suburbs. The author provides no evidence
that the existence of an expressway would suffice to entice people to work in this city's
downtown area. Moreover, the author ignores the possibility that people who might want to
work in the city's downtown area would generally prefer to live in that area as well. In this case
the expressway would be of no help in attracting qualified workers to this city's downtown area.
A third problem with the argument is that it unfairly assumes that the expressway will result
in a net influx, rather than outflow, of workers to the downtown area. In fact, the expressway
might make it easier for people who currently live and work downtown to commute to jobs in
other areas or even relocate their businesses to outlying areas. Either scenario would serve to
undermine the author's claim that the expressway would provide a boon to the downtown
economy.
Finally, the argument rests on the assumption that funds used to build the expressway and
to create jobs for construction workers cannot be applied to some other program instead---one
that would be even more effective in promoting the health of the downtown economy. Without
identifying and weighing such alternatives, the author cannot defend the conclusion that voters
should approve the expressway project.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
provide strong evidence that the expressway would help alleviate shortages of supply and
materials among downtown businesses and manufacturers. The author must also show that
the expressway would in fact result in a net influx of workers who would change jobs because
of the availability of the expressway. Finally, to better evaluate the argument we would need
more information about possible alternatives to the proposal, and whether any such alternative
would be more effective in promoting the health of the downtown economy.























Argument 113
The following appeared in a recommendation from the planning department of the city of Transopolis.
"Ten years ago, as part of a comprehensive urban renewal program, the city of Transopolis
adapted for industrial use a large area of severely substandard housing near the freeway.
Subsequently, several factories were constructed there, crime rates in the area declined, and
property tax revenues for the entire city increased. To further revitalize the city, we should now
take similar action in a declining residential area on the opposite side of the city. Since some
houses and apartments in existing nearby neighborhoods are currently unoccupied, alternate
housing for those displaced by this action will be readily available."
The planning department for the city of Transopolis recommends, as part of its urban
renewal plan, that the city convert a certain residential area for industrial use and relocate
residents from that area to nearby unoccupied housing. To support this recommendation, the
planners point out that ten years ago the city converted an area of substandard housing on the
other side of town, near a freeway, for industrial use, and that afterwards that area's crime rate
declined while the city's overall property-tax revenue increased. I fred the recommendation
specious on several grounds.
To begin with, the recommendation relies on two poor assumptions about the effects of the
freeway-area conversion. One such assumption is that the freeway-area conversion caused
the decline in that area's crime rate. The mere fact that the conversion occurred before the
decline does not suffice to prove that the conversion caused the decline. Perhaps the true
cause was some unrelated development--such as a new city-wide "tough-on-crime" policy or
improvements in police training. Another such assumption is that the increase in overall
property-tax revenue indicates an increase in tax revenue from properties in the freeway area.
Perhaps property-tax revenue from the converted properies remained the same, or even
declined, after the conversion, and that the city's overall property-tax revenue increase was
attributable to properties located elsewhere in the city. For that matter, perhaps the city raised
its property-tax rates shortly after the conversion. In short, without ruling out alternative
explanations for the developments that came after the freeway-area conversion, the planners
cannot convince me that the conversion was responsible for those developments.
Even if the evidence turns out to substantiate the two foregoing assumptions, the
recommendation further assumes that the proposed conversion would carry the same results
as the freeway-area conversion. Yet key differences between the two areas might undermine
the analogy. For example, perhaps the properties surrounding the ones converted in the
freeway area were not residential. Common sense informs me that crimes such as burglary
and robbery are less likely in areas where few people reside. Since at least some nearby
housing is available for residents displaced by the proposed conversion, this conversion might
not result in any significant decline in the area's crime rate. At the same time, unless
unoccupied nearby housing can accommodate all displaced residents, the conversion might
create a homelessness problem, thereby undermining the city's objectives.
Finally, the recommendation assumes that all conditions bearing on whether residential
to-industrial conversions would help renew Transopolis have remained unchanged over the
past ten years--and will continue unchanged in the foreseeable future. Yet, perhaps
Transopolis had more and better housing for displaced residents ten years ago than today. Or
perhaps Transopolis would have more trouble finding occupants for additional industrial
buildings today than it did ten years ago. Indeed, a myriad of factors---including the reg4onal
and national economy, demographic shifts, and political influences--might explain why an
urban-renewal program that had a Salutary impact on Transopolis' crime rate and property-tax
revenues in the past might nevertheless not revitalize the city today, or in the future.
In sum, the planners' recommendation is largely unfounded. To bolster it they must provide
clear evidence that the freeway-area conversion contributed to the decline in that area's crime
rate and to the city's overall property-tax revenue increase. To better assess the argument I
would need to know what other changes have occurred in the city that might explain those
developments. Finally, to better assess the proposed plan's chances of success I would need
to compare the circumstances surrounding the decline in the area slated for conversion with
the decline in the freeway area prior to its conversion.























Argument 114
The following appeared in a letter to the editor of a local newspaper.
"The members of the town school board should not be reelected because they are not
concerned about promoting high-quality education in the arts in our local schools. For example,
student participation in the high school drama club has been declining steadily, and this year
the school board refused to renew the contract of the drama director, even though he had
received many awards for his original plays. Meanwhile, over $300,000 of the high school
budget goes to athletic programs, and the head football coach is now the highest-paid member
of the teaching staff."
This editorial argues that the town's school board members are unconcerned about
promoting high-quality arts education in local schools, and therefore should not be reelected.
To support this argument the editorial's author points out that student participation in
high-school drama programs has been declining steadily, and that the board recently refused
to renew the high-school drama director's contract, despite the fact that he has written several
award-winning plays. The author also cites the fact that $300,000 of the high school budget is
allotted to athletic programs, and that the head football coach is the highest paid teacher. This
argument is unpersuasive for a variety of reasons.
First and foremost, the editorial indicates neither how long the current board members have
occupied their board positions nor the scope of their authority. Perhaps they are new members
and the facts that the editorial cites are attributable to events and decisions occurring before
the current board members assumed their positions. If so, and if the current board either has
not had adequate opportunity or does not have adequate authority to reverse these
developments, then any claim regarding their level of concern about arts education is
unjustifiable--at least based on the evidence cited.
Even assuming adequate authority and tenure on the part of the current board members,
they are not necessarily responsible for the declining student participation in drama programs.
The decline might be due to some other factor. For instance, perhaps students generally
dislike the current drama director. If so, then the board's refusal to renew his contract would
indicate that the board is attempting to reverse the decline, and that the board is in fact
concerned about facilitating arts education.
As for the fact that $300,000 is devoted to athletic programs, the editorial does not indicate
the school's total budget. It is entirely possible that $300,000 accounts for a small portion of
that budget compared to the amount budgeted for the arts. If so, and if the current school
board is at least partly responsible for the current budget, these facts would cast considerable
doubt on the editorial's claim that the board is unconcerned about promoting arts education.
Admittedly, the fact that the head football coach is the highest paid teacher provides some
support for the editorial's claim assuming that the current board members are at least
partially responsible for that salary. However, this fact in itself is insufficient to show that the
board members are unconcerned about promoting arts education. Perhaps the football coach
carries additional duties that warrant the high salary; in fact, perhaps he also teaches drama or
music. Or perhaps his salary is high simply because he has been a teaching-staff member
longer than nearly any other local school teacher.
Finally, the editorial's claim overlooks the fact that local arts education embraces not just
high school drama but also drama programs at lower levels, and music, dance, and visual and
graphic-arts programs. Thus even if the board's decisions indicate that they place a low priority
on high-school drama education, it is entirely possible that the board is reallocating resources
from that program to other arts programs. If so, then the editorial's claim is wrong, and the
proper conclusion is that the board is actively concerned about promoting arts education as a
whole in local schools.
In sum, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the editorial's author
must at the very least assure me that the current board members have been on the board long
enough to have adequate opportunity to demonstrate their level of concern for arts education,
and that they have the authority to do so. The author should also provide clear evidence that
the decisions of these board members were responsible for the declining student participation
in drama programs. To better assess the argument I would need to know the reason why the
board has not renewed the current drama director's contract. I would also need to know what
percentage of the high school's current budget is allocated not just to drama programs but to
arts education generally, so that I could compare that percentage with the percentages
allocated to other programs.























Argument 115
The following appeared in a memo from the sales manager of Eco-Power, a company that manufactures tools and home appliances.
"Many popular radio and television commercials use memorable tunes and song lyrics to call
attention to the products being advertised. Indeed, a recent study of high school students
showed that 85 percent could easily recognize the tunes used to advertise leading soft drinks
and fast-food restaurants. Despite our company's extensive advertising in magazines during
the past year, sales of our home appliances declined. Therefore, to boost company profits, we
should now switch to advertisements featuring a distinctive song."
In this memo Eco-Power's sales manager recommends that the company switch from print
ads to ads with catchy songs in order to reverse its declining profits. To support this
recommendation the memo cites the fact that most high-school students easily recognize
tunes used to advertise leading soft-drinks and fast-food restaurants. However, the argument
is unconvincing in light of several problems.
A threshold problem with the argument is that the author assumes that the current ad strategy
is the cause of Eco-Power's declining profits. The author provides no evidence that this is the
case. It is entirely possible that other factors are responsible for the decline. Perhaps the
demand for all tools and home appliances generally has slowed; or perhaps Eco-Power's
management or pricing policies are to blame. Without ruling out such possibilities, the author
cannot persuade me that switching ad strategies would reverse Eco-Power's declining profits.
Another problem with the argument involves the memo's reliance on the high rate of
tune-recognition among teenagers. For two reasons, this evidence lends little credible support
for the recommended strategy. First, even if Eco-Power were to achieve a high rate of
tune-recognition among teenagers, this demographic group is not the same group that
purchases tools and home appliances. Secondly, even assuming Eco-Power can achieve a
high tune-recognition rate among its target demographic group, this fact alone is no guarantee
that these consumers would be more likely to buy Eco-Power products as a result of
recognizing the company's tunes.
A third problem with the argument is that it assumes that the increased sales due to a high
tune-recognition rate would outweigh the costs of achieving this rate. However, a tune can be
communicated only via such media as radio and television; and real-world experience informs
us that these advertising media are more costly than print media. Although leading soft-drink
and fast-food companies can well afford the costs of producing effective tunes and of ensuring
that these tunes are heard again and again by many, many consumers, Eco-Power might lack
the resources to ensure the sort of tune recognition which these other companies have
achieved. Unless the sales manager can convince us that the proposed ad strategy will be
cost effective, his conclusion that this strategy will result in increased profits for Eco-Power is
untenable.
In condusion, the sales manager has not provided a convincing argument for the proposed
ad strategy. To strengthen the argument the manager must show that the current ad strategy is
in fact the cause of Eco-Power's declining profits. The manager must also provide strong
evidence that the people who buy the kinds of tools Eco-Power sells would hear the
company's tunes frequently enough to immediately associate the tune with the company, and
that this association would cause these listeners to buy Eco Power products. Finally, to better
evaluate the argument we would need a detailed cost benefit analysis of the proposed ad
strategy.























Argument 116
The following appeared in a memo from the vice president of a company that builds shopping malls throughout the country.
"The surface of a section of Route 101, paved two years ago by McAdam Road Builders, is
now badly cracked and marred by dangerous potholes. In another part of the state, a section
of Route 66, paved by Appian Roadways more than four years ago, is still in good condition.
Appian Roadways has recently purchased state-of-the-art paving machinery, and it has hired a
new quality-control manager. Because of its superior work and commitment to quality, we
should contract with Appian Roadways rather than McAdam Road Builders to construct the
access roads for all our new shopping malls."
The vice president of a company that builds shopping malls argues here that the company
should hire Appian rather than McAdam to build access roads for the company. To support this
argument the vice president points out that a certain area of Route 101 that McAdam repaved
two years ago has deteriorated significantly, while a certain stretch of Route 66 that Appian
repaved four years ago remains in good condition. The vice president also points out that
Appian recently acquired new state-of-the-art paving equipment and hired a new
quality-control manager. I find the vice president's argument logically unconvincing--in several
respects.
First of all, it is unfair to infer based solely on the comparison between the two stretches of
highway that Appian does better work than McAdam. The inference relies on the poor
assumption that the comparative qnality of two contractors' work, rather than some other
phenomenon, was responsible for the comparative condition of the two stretches of pavement.
Perhaps the stretch that McAdam repaved is located in an area whose extremes in climate or
high traffic volume serve to erode and damage pavement very quickly. For that matter, perhaps
soil or other geological conditions in that area were primarily responsible for deterioration of
the pavement along that stretch. In short, without showing that all other conditions in the two
areas have been essentially the same, the vice president cannot convince me that the quality
of McAdam's and Appian's repaying work was responsible for the difference in how well the
two stretches of pavement have held up.
Secondly, it is unfair to conclude based on Appian's recent equipment acquisition and
personnel decision that Appian will do a better job than McAdam. Perhaps McAdam has also
acquired the same type of equipment. Moreover, perhaps McAdam's quality-control manager
is far more experienced than Appian's new manager, and as a result McAdam's product is
likely to be better than Appian's. Besides, equipment and on-site management are only two of
many factors affecting the quality of a pavement job. Other such factors include the experience
and competence of other workers, and the paving material used. Without showing that the two
firms are similar in these and other respects, the vice president cannot justify his
recommendation of Appian over McAdam.
Finally, the vice president's recommendation rests on the unlikely assumption that the
company has only two altematives--McAdam and Appian. In all likelihood the company can
engage one of many other paving contractors instead. Thus to the extent the vice president
recommends Appian over not just McAdam but over any other contractor the recommendation
is unwarranted.
In sum, the vice president has not convinced me that the company should hire Appian. To
strengthen the argument the vice president must provide dear evidence that it was the quality
of McAdam's and Appian's work rather than one or more other factors--that resulted in the
difference between how well the two stretches of pavement have held up over time. The vice
president must also provide better evidence that Appian's new equipment and new manager
will enhance, or at least maintain, the quality of Appian's overall work at a higher level than
McAdam's overall work. Finally, to better assess the argument I would need to know what
other paving contractors the company could hire, and the quality of those contractors' work
compared to McAdam's and Appian's.
























Argument 117
The following appeared in a newspaper feature story.
"There is now evidence that the relaxed manner of living in small towns promotes better health
and greater longevity than does the hectic pace of life in big cities. Businesses in the small
town of Leeville report fewer days of sick leave taken by individual workers than do businesses
in the nearby large city of Mason City. Furthermore, Leeville has only one physician for its one
thousand residents, but in Mason City the proportion of physicians to residents is five times as
high. And the average age of Leeville residents is significantly higher than that of Mason City
residents. These findings suggest that people seeking longer and healthier lives should
consider moving to small communities."
This newspaper story concludes that living in a small town promotes health and longevity.
The story's author bases this conclusion on a comparison between the small town of LeeviUe
and nearby Mason City, a much larger town. However, careful scrutiny of the author's evidence
reveals that it lends no credible support to the author's conclusion.
A threshold problem with the argument is that the author draws a general conclusion about
the effect of a town's size on the health and longevity of its residents based only on
characteristics of two towns. The author provides no evidence that these two towns (or their
residents) are representative of other towns their size. In other words, this limited sample
simply does not warrant any general conclusions about the effect of a town's size on the health
and longevity of its residents.
Next, the author cites the fact that the incidence of sick leave in Leeville is less than in
Mason City. This evidence would lend support to the argument only if the portion of local
residents employed by local businesses were nearly the same in both towns, and only if the
portion of employees who are local residents were nearly the same in both towns. Moreover, in
relying on this evidence the author assumes that the portion of sick employees who actually
take sick leave is nearly the same in both towns. In short, without showing that the two towns
are similar in these ways, the author cannot draw any reliable comparisons about the overall
health of the towns' residents--or about the impact of town size on health.
The author also cites the fact that Mason City has five times as many physicians per
resident than Leeville. However, any number of factors besides the health of the towns'
residents might explain this disparity. For example, perhaps Leeville residents choose to travel
to Mason City for physician visits. Without ruling out such explanations, these
physician-resident ratios prove nothing about the comparative health of LeeviUe and Mason
City residents---or about the impact of town size on health.
Finally, the author cites the fact that the average age of Leeville residents is higher than that
of Mason City residents. However, any number of factors might explain this disparity. For
example, perhaps Leeville is a retirement community, while Mason City attracts younger
working people. For that matter, perhaps LeeviUe is comprised mainly of former Mason City
residents whose longevity is attributable chiefly to their former life-style in Mason City. In any
event, the author cannot justify the conclusion that this disparity in average age is due to the
difference in size between the two towns.
In conclusion, the argument that small-town living promotes good health and longevity is
unpersuasive as it stands. To strengthen the argument the author must provide clear evidence
that the overall population of Leeville, not just employees in LeeviUe, is healthier than that of
Mason City. The author must also provide strong evidence that Leeville and Mason City
residents visit local physicians whenever they become sick. Finally, to better evaluate the
argument we would need more information about why the average age of Leeville residents
exceeds that of Mason City residents.























Argument 118
The following appeared in a memorandum from the general manager of KNOW radio station.
"Several factors indicate that radio station KNOW should shift its programming from
rock-and-roll music to a continuous news format. Consider, for example, the number of older
people in our listening area has increased dramatically, while the total number of our listeners
has recently declined. Also, music stores in our area report decreased sales of recorded music.
Finally, continuous news stations in neighboring cities have been very successful, and a
survey taken just before the recent election shows that local citizens are interested in
becoming better informed about politics."
This memo recommends that KNOW radio station shift from rock-and-roll (R&R) music
programming to all-news programming. To support this recommendation the manager points
out that the number of KNOW listeners is decreasing while the number of older people in
KNOW's listening area is increasing. The manager also points out that area sales of music
recordings are in decline, and that a recent survey suggests that local residents are becoming
better informed about politics. Finally, the manager cites the success of aU-news stations in
nearby cities. Careful scrutiny of the manager's argument reveals several unproven
assumptions, which render it unconvincing.
First, the manager unfairly assumes that the decline in the number of KNOW listeners is
attributable to the station's current format. Perhaps the decline is due instead to KNOW's
specific mix of R&R music, or to transmission problems at the station. Without ruling out these
and other feasible reasons for the decline, the manager cannot convince me that changing the
format would reverse the trend.
Secondly, the manager's assumption that older people favor all-news programming is
unsupported. Perhaps KNOW listeners are dedicated R&R fans who will continue to prefer this
type of programming as they grow older. Or perhaps as KNOW's regular audience ages it will
prefer a mix of R&R and news programming--rather than one format to the total exclusion of
the other. Besides, the number of young people in the listening area might be increasing as
well. In short, the mere fact that the number of older people in KNOW's listening area is
increasing suggests nothing about KNOW's best programming strategy.
Thirdly, a decrease in local music recording sales is scant evidence that KNOW should
eschew music in favor of an all-news format. Although overall music sales are in decline,
perhaps sales of R&R recordings are actually increasing while sales of all other types of music
recordings are decreasing. For that matter, perhaps people who buy music recordings are
generally not the same people who listen to music on the radio. Either scenario, if true, would
seriously undermine the manager's contention that KNOW should discontinue R&R
programming.
Fourth, it is unfair to conclude from one survey suggesting that local residents are becoming
better informed about politics that they are becoming less interested in listening to R&R music,
or that they are becoming more interested in listening to news. After all, news embraces many
topics in addition to politics. Besides, there is no reason why people interested in politics
cannot also be interested in listening to R&R music. Moreover, a single survey taken just prior
to an election is poor evidence that local residents' piqued interest in politics is sustainable.
Finally, it is unwarranted to infer from the success of all-news stations in nearby dries that
KNOW will also succeed by following the same format. Those stations might owe their success
to their powerful transmitters, popular newscasters, or other factors. Besides, the very success
of these stations suggests that the area's radio listeners might favor those well-established
news providers over the fledgling all-news KNOW.
In sum, the manager's evidence accomplishes little toward supporting the manager's
argument for the proposed format shift. To further bolster the argument the manager must
provide better evidence, perhaps by way of a reliable survey, that people within KNOW's
listening area are becoming more interested in news and less interested in R&R music--or any
other kind of music. The manager must also show that an all-news format would be more
popular than a mixed format of music and news, and that a significant number of people would
prefer KNOW's all-news programming over that of other stations in the listening area.























Argument 119
"Solano's music education programs"
This letter concludes that Solano school district should discontinue its music programs
altogether. To justify this conclusion the author points out that only 20% of Solano's students
enroll in music classes and that few Solano students pursue music as a major course of study
in college. The author also points out that in nearby Rutherford student grades increased the
year after that district discontinued music education. This argument is problematic in several
critical respects.
A threshold problem with the argument is that it relies on certain implicit assumptions about
the value of music education. Specifically, the author assumes that any education program is
valuable only to the extent that it enhances overall grades and only if students choose to
pursue that course of study in college. Such normative assumptions are dubious at best;
common sense tells me that the chiefvalue of music education, like that of art or physical
education, lies in its contribution to the full development of a child, not in its influence on
grades or choice of career. Without addressing this issue, the author's condusion can be
dismissed out of hand.
Another problem with the argument involves the implicit claim that only 20% of Solano
students enroll in music courses because they are uninterested in music. This da/m assumes
that students have a choice in what courses they take in the first place; yet we are not informed
that this is the case. It also unfairly assumes that no other factor influences students' decisions
about whether to enroll in music courses. Perhaps Solano's current music teachers are
unpopular; or perhaps the district lacks sufficient funds to meet current demand for music
courses or to provide adequate facilities and instruments for more students. Since the author
has not ruled out these other possible explanations for the low enrollment rate, the author's
implicit claim that Solano students are not interested in music is doubtful at best.
Yet another problem with the argument involves the implicit claim that music education is not
worthwhile because few Solano students pursue music as a college major. This claim
assumes that all Solano students pursuing a career in music attend college in the first place;
yet this is not necessarily the case. The claim also assumes that Solano students are properly
advised about choosing their college major; yet it is entirely possible that Solano's high school
advisors dissuade students from pursuing music. Since the author fails to rule out these
possibilities, the fact that few Solano students pursue music in college lends little credible
support for the author's conclusion.
A final problem with the argument involves Rutherford's increase in its students' grades the
year after that district discontinued music programs. This increase might be attributable to
numerous factors. Perhaps that year Rutherford received substantial funding to enhance its
after-school tutoring program; or perhaps it hired more effective teachers that year. Or perhaps
the outgoing graduating class one year was less bright overall than the incoming freshman
class the next year. Any of these scenarios, if true, would discredit the author's assertion that
music education contributes to lower academic grades. Besides, the author cites an increase
during only one year--an insufficiently small range to draw any reliable general conclusion.
In sum, the author's argument for discontinuing music education is weak. To strengthen the
argument the author must show that the cited statistics about Solano students reflect their lack
of interest in music rather than some other phenomenon, and that the increase in Rutherford's
grades were the result of its discontinuing music education.























Argument 120
The following appeared as part of an article in a local Beauville newspaper.
"According to a government report, last year the city of Dillton reduced its corporate tax rate by
15 percent; at the same time, it began offering relocation grants and favorable rates on city
utilities to any company that would relocate to Dillton. Within 18 months, two manufacturing
companies moved to Dillton, where they employ a total of 300 people. Therefore, the fastest
way for Beauville to stimulate economic development and hence reduce unemployment is to
provide tax incentives and other financial inducements that encourage private companies to
relocate here."
This article argues that the fastest way for Beauville to stimulate its economic development
and reduce unemployment would be to provide the same kinds of tax and financial incentives
for business as the incentives which the city of Dillton began providing 18 months ago. Dillton's
incentives included a reduced corporate tax rate as well as relocation grants and favorable
utility rates for businesses willing to relocate to DiUton. The article points out that during the
last 18 months two manufacturing companies, which together now employ 300 people,
relocated to Dillton. The argument is logically unconvincing in several respects.
To begin with, the argument depends on the assumption that the two businesses moving to
DiUton did so because of Dillton's new incentives--rather than for some other reason. Yet
lacking evidence to the contrary it is entirely possible that the two businesses were morivated
primarily by Dillton's climate, labor pool, or some other factor. Without ruling out all other
reasons why the two businesses might have relocated to DiUton, the argument that BeauviUe
can entice businesses to move to BeauviUe by offering similar incenrives is dubious at best.
Even if it was Dillton's new incentives that enticed the two manufacturers to Dillton, the
argument relies on the further assumption that the two firms' relocating to Dillton in fact had a
beneficial impact on the city's economy. Yet the only evidence the article offers to substantiate
this assumption is that the two manufacturers now employ 300 people. Perhaps those 300
employees left other jobs in DiUton to go to work for those two finns; if so, then the incentives
had no positive impact on Dillton's employment rate. Or perhaps other businesses have left
Dillton during the last 18 months, taking even more job opportunities with them. For that matter,
perhaps on average more businesses relocated to DiUton each year prior to DiUton's
establishing the new incentives than afterwards. In short, without more information about
DiUton's economic conditions and employment level both before and after the incentives were
established it is impossible to assess whether those incentives had a positive or negative
impact--or any impact at all--on DiUton's overall economy.
Even if Dillton's new incentives did in fact serve to help Dillton's economy, the arride unfairly
assumes that similar incentives will carry a similar result for BeauviUe. It is entirely possible
that the two dries differ in ways that would undermine the effectiveness of similar incentives for
BeauviUe. For instance, perhaps BeauviUe's labor pool is smaller; or perhaps unemployed
BeauviUe residents would be less willing or able to go to work if offered the chance. Without
accounting for such differences any analogy between the two cities is premanare, and any
conclusion based on that analogy is unjustified. Furthermore, the author's inference that
incentives which were effective in the past will also be effective in the future rests on the poor
assumption that during the last 18 months all conditions upon which their effectiveness
depend have remained unchanged. Perhaps the general economy is expected to turn down.
Or perhaps other dries have recently begun to provide similar incentives. Indeed, the fact that
DiUton is already providing these incentives might actually portend failure for Beauville, which
might need to devise even stronger incentives to convince businesses to move to BeauviUe
rather than Dillton.
Finally, the article fails to consider any other course of action that might help Beauville attain
the same economic goals. Perhaps by improving its schools or hospitals, or by reducing its
crime rate, BeauviUe can just as quickly and effectively attract new businesses and achieve its
economic objectives. In short, without weighing the proposal against alternatives, the artide's
daim that the proposed incentives are the "best" means of achieving Beauville's objectives is
wholly unconvincing.
To sum up, the article has not convinced me that the proposed incentives would be the best
way for Beauville to achieve its economic goals. To bolster the argument the article's author
must provide clear evidence that Dillton's incentives--and not some other phenomenon-were in
fact responsible for stimulating Dillton's economy during the last 18 months. To better assess
the argument I would need to know what other conditions in Beauville that were not present in
Dillton might dissuade businesses from moving to Beauville--despite the proposed incentives.
I would also need to compare near-term economic forecasts with economic conditions during
the last 18 months. Finally, I would need to consider the proposed incentives in light of
alternative courses of action.























Argument 121
The following appeared in a memorandum from the president of Mira Vista College to the college's board of trustees.
"At nearby Green Mountain College, which has more business courses and more job
counselors than does Mira Vista College, 90 percent of last year's graduating seniors had job
offers from prospective employers. But at Mira Vista College last year, only 70 percent of the
seniors who informed the placement office that they would be seeking employment had found
full-time jobs within three months after graduation, and only half of these graduates were
employed in their major field of study. To help Mira Vista's graduates find employment, we
must offer more courses in business and computer technology and hire additional job
counselors to help students with their resums and interviewing skills."
This letter recommends that in order to improve its job placement record Mira Vista College
should offer more business and computer courses and should hire more job counselors. To
support this recommendation the author points out that at Green Mountain College 90 percent
of last year's graduates had job offers, but that only 70 percent of Mira Vista seniors who
reported that they planned to seek employment had jobs within three months after graduation,
and only half of these graduates were employed in their major fields of study. This argument is
problematic in several critical respects.
First, the author assumes that Green Mountain's comparatively strong job-placement record
is due to the fact that it provides more business courses and job counselors than Mira Vista,
rather than some other factor. But this need not be the case. Perhaps Green Mountain
students are exceptionally bright or resourceful to begin with. Or perhaps the quality of
instruction and job counseling at Green Mountain is exceptionally high. Moreover, perhaps
Green Mountain provides more business courses and job counselors than Mira Vista simply
because Green Mountain is a larger school with more students; if so, then the comparative
numbers are not likely to have any bearing on job-placement success. In short, without ruling
out other possible explanations for the difference between job-placement rates, the author
cannot reasonably conclude that additional business courses and job counselors would
enhance Mira Vista's job-placement record.
Another problem with the argument is that the statistics comparing job placement rates
might be distorted in one or more respects. First, the author fails to indicate the percentage of
Green Mountain graduates who find employment in their major fields of study. Without this
information it is impossible to assess the comparative success of the two colleges in helping
their recent graduates find such employment. Second, the author ignores the possibility that
the time parameters defining the two schools' job-placement rates differ. Mira Vista's record
was determined only three months after graduation. It is entirely possible that Green
Mountain's record was based on a longer period of fi_me, thereby distorting the comparative
success of the schools in helping their recent graduates find jobs.
The cited statistics about Mira Vista's job placement record might be unreliable in other
respects as well. These statistics were based only on data from Mira Vista seniors who
reported to the college's job-placement center. The author overlooks the possibility that only a
small portion of Mira Vista seniors reported to begin with. The author also ignores the
possibility that many of these reporting students later changed their minds about seeking
employment or were offered jobs but turned them down. Without ruling out these possible
scenarios, the author cannot reasonably rely on these statistics to support the claim that Mira
Vista's job-placement record is comparatively poor and thus could be improved by Mira Vista's
emulating Green Mountain.
In conclusion, the argument is unconvincing as it stands. To strengthen it the author must
show that additional business courses and job counselors would in fact improve Mira Vista's
job-placement rate, and that the comparison between the job-placement rates at the two
schools is fair. Finally, the author provides no evidence whatsoever to support his
recommendation for providing more computer courses; to justify this claim the author must
provide supporting evidence.























Argument 122
The following appeared as an editorial in the local newspaper of Dalton.
"When the neighboring town of Williamsville adopted a curfew four months ago that made it
illegal for persons under the age of 18 to loiter or idle in public places after 10 p.m., youth crime
in Williamsville dropped by 27 percent during curfew hours. In Williamsville's town square, the
area where its citizens were once most outraged at the high crime rate, not a single crime has
been reported since the curfew was introduced. Therefore, to help reduce its own rising crime
rate, the town of Dalton should adopt the same kind of curfew. A curfew that keeps young
people at home late at night will surely control juvenile delinquency and protect minors from
becoming victims of crime."
The author of this editorial argues that in order to reduce its rising crime rate the city of
Dalton should establish a 10:00 curfew for minors under age 18. The author also claims that
the curfew would control juvenile delinquency as well as preventing minors from becoming
crime victims. To support these claims the author points out that WiUiamsville established a
similar curfew four months ago, and that since then WiUiamsville's youth crime rate has
dropped by 27% during curfew hours. The author also points out that in Williamsville's town
square no crimes have been reported in the last four months, yet Williamsville residents had
previously expressed particular outrage about the square's high crime rate. I find the editorial
logically unconvincing in several respects.
To begin with, the author has failed to convinceme that Williamsville's overall crime rate has
declined, or that the curfew was responsible for any such decline. It is entirely possible that
although that city's youth crime rate has declined, its adult crime rate has risen. If so, this fact
would seriously call into question the author's claim that a similar curfew would reduce Dalton's
overall crime rate. Even if Williamsville's overall crime rate has declined in the last four months,
the decline is not necessarily attributable to the curfew. Perhaps WilliamsviUe has also
enhanced its police enforcement, or established social programs that help minors avoid
delinquency. In short, without evidence that all other conditions that might affect Williamsville's
crime rate have remained unchanged during the last four months, the author's claim that the
curfew is responsible for the drop in that city's crime rate is dubious at best.
Moreover, the evidence involving the town square does not adequately show that
Williamsville's curfew has been effective in reducing its crime rate. The number of crimes
reported in the square does not necessarily reflect the number actually committed there.
Also, it is entirely possible that Williamsville's residents had already abandoned the town
square at night by the time WilliamsviUe established the curfew. If so, then the mere fact that
no crimes in the square have been committed or reported recently proves nothing about the
effectiveness of the curfew.
Even if Williamsville's curfew was responsible for a decline in that city's overall crime rate,
the editorial's claim that a similar curfew would be effective in Dalton is unwarranted. Dalton
might differ from Williamsville in ways that would undermine the curfew's effectiveness in
Dalton. Or perhaps the percentage of crimes that are committed by adults is far greater in
Dalton that in W'filiamsville. In either case, a curfew that is effective in reducing WilliamsviUe's
overall crime rate might be far less effective in reducing Dalton's.
Even assuming the proposed curfew would reduce Dalton's overall crime rate, the author
unfairly infers that the curfew would also curb juvenile delinquency. The author's definition of
juvenile delinquency might embrace additional behaviors--ones that don't amount to crimes.
Besides, a reduction in the overall crime rate does not necessarily indicate a reduction in the
youth crime rate.
The author's further inference that the curfew would protect minors from becoming crime
victims is also unwarranted. This inference depends on the assumption that all crimes against
youths occur during curfew hours. Yet common sense informs me that many such crimes
occur during other hours. The inference also rests on the assumption that it is adults who are
committing all crimes against youths. Yet the author fails to account for the possibility that
some crimes against youths are committed by other youths.
In sum, the editorial relies on a series of dubious assumptions, which render it wholly
unpersuasive. To bolster the editorial's claims the author must provide clear evidence that the
curfew, and not some other phenomenon, was in fact responsible for a decline in
WilliamsviUe's youth crime rate. The author must also show that the curfew would have a
similar effect in Dalton, and that the curfew would result in a decline in not just the youth crime
rate but also the overall crime rate. To better assess the author's final two claims I would need
to know how the author defines 'juvenile delinquency,' and what percentage of crimes against
Dalton's youth are committed by other youths.























Argument 123
The following appeared in a memo written by a dean at Buckingham College.
"To serve the housing needs of our students, Buckingham College should build a new
dormitory. Buckingham's enrollment is growing and, based on current trends, should double
over the next fifty years, thus making existing dormitories inadequate. Moreover, the average
rent for an apartment in our town has increased in recent years. Consequently, students will
find it increasingly difficult to afford off-campus housing. Finally, an attractive new dormitory
would make prospective students more likely to enroll at Buckingham."
In this memo a dean at Buckingham College recommends that in order to meet expected
enrollment increases the college should build an additional dormitory. To support this
recommendation the dean points out that rental rates for off-campus apartments have been
increasing, thus making it more difficult for students to afford this housing option. The dean
also points out that a new dormitory would attract prospective students to the college. This
argument is problematic in several respects.
A threshold problem with the argument involves the statistical reliability of the reports about
off-campus rental rates. The dean indicates only that "student leaders" reported these
statistics; the dean provides no information about how these students collected their data. It is
entirely possible that the report was based on an insufficiently small sample, or a sample that
was unrepresentative of the town's overall student rental market.
Secondly, the dean assumes that this current trend in rental rates will continue in the future;
yet the dean offers no evidence to substantiate this assumption. These rates are a function of
supply and demand, and it is entirely possible that construction of apartment houses will
increase in the future, thereby reducing rental rates along with the need for an additional
dormitory. Without considering this possible scenario, the dean cannot justifiably conclude that
an additional dormitory is needed to meet future demand.
Thirdly, the dean assumes that as enrollment increases the demand for student housing will
also increase. While this might be the case, the dean ignores the possibility that the increased
enrollment will be the result of an increase in the number of students commuting to
Buckingham from their parents' homes. This scenario, if true, would render the dean's
argument for building a new dormitory untenable.
Yet another problem with the argument involves the dean's final claim that an attractive new
dormitory would attract prospective students to Buckingham. Even assuming students in fact
choose colleges on this basis, by relying on this evidence the dean essentially provides an
argument against building the new dormitory. If an attractive new dormitory would increase
demand for dormitory space, this fact would only serve to undermine the dean's conflicting
claim that the new dormitory would help meet increasing demand for dormitory space.
In conclusion, the dean's recommendation is not well supported. To strengthen it the dean
must provide clear evidence that average rental rates for off-campus student apartments have
in fact been increasing, that this trend will continue in the future, and that this trend will in fact
result in an increased demand for dormitory housing.























Argument 124
The following appeared in a memo at the XYZ company.
"When XYZ lays off employees, it pays Delany Personnel Firm to offer those employees
assistance in creating resums and developing interviewing skills, if they so desire. Laid-off
employees have benefited greatly from Delany's services: last year those who used Delany
found jobs much more quickly than did those who did not. Recently, it has been proposed that
we use the less-expensive Walsh Personnel Firm in place of Delany. This would be a mistake
because eight years ago, when XYZ was using Walsh, only half of the workers we laid off at
that time found jobs within a year. Moreover, Delany is clearly superior, as evidenced by its
bigger staff and larger number of branch offices. After all, last year Delany's clients took an
average of six months to find jobs, whereas Walsh's clients took nine."
This XYZ company memo recommends that XYZ continue to use Delany instead of Walsh
as its personnel service for helping laid-off XYZ employees find new jobs. To support this
recommendation the memo points out that 8 years ago, when XYZ was using Walsh, only half
of XYZ's laid-off workers found new jobs within a year. The memo also points out that last year
XYZ employees using DeNny's services found jobs much more quickly than those who did not,
and that the average DeNny client found a job in 6 months, compared to 9 months for the
average Walsh client. The memo also mentions that DeNny has more branch offices and a
larger staff than Walsh. I find the memo's argument unconvincing for several reasons.
To begin with, Walsh's prior rate of placing laid-off XYZ employees is not necessarily a
reliable indicator of what that rate would be now. Perhaps the placement rate 8 years ago was
due to a general economic downturn or some other factor beyond Walsh's control. For that
matter, perhaps the rate was relatively high among all placement services during that time
period. In short, without ruling out other possible reasons for Walsh's ostensi bly low
placement rate 8 years ago, and without convincing me that this rate was low to begin with, the
memo's author cannot convince me on the basis of XYZ's past experience with Walsh that
XYZ should favor DeNny over Walsh.
The memo also makes two hasty assumptions about the benefits of DeNny's services last
year. One such assumption is that these services were in fact responsible for helping the
laid-offXYZ employees who used those services find jobs more quickly. It is entirely possible
that the comparative success of this group was due instead to their other aggressive
job-seeking efforts, which might even have included using Walsh's services--m addition to
DeNny's. Also, the memo unfairly equates the speed with which one finds a job with
job-seeking success. Common sense informs me that the effectiveness of a job search
depends not only on how quickly one finds a job, but also on compensation, benefits, location,
and type of work.
Furthermore, the difference in the two firms' overall placement time last year does not
necessarily indicate that DeNny would be the better choice to serve XYZ's laid-off employees.
These employees might have particular skills or needs that are not representative of the two
firms' clients in general. Besides, a single year's placement statistics hardly suffices to draw
any firm conclusions. Last year might have been exceptional--perhaps due to some unusual
event that is unlikely to reoccur, such as a major employer's move to an area that DeNny
serves, or out of an area that Walsh serves.
Finally, the fact that Delany has more branch offices and a larger staff than Walsh proves
nothing in itself about which firm would be more effective in finding jobs for laid-off XYZ
employees. Perhaps these employees generally look for jobs in geographic areas or industries
outside of Delany's domain. Or perhaps the number of Delany staff members per office is
actually lower than at Walsh. Either scenario, if true, would cast serious doubt on the memo's
conclusion that XYZ should favor Delany over Walsh.
In sum, as it stands the recommendation is not well supported. To bolster it the memo's
author must provide better evidence--perhaps from XYZ's records--that Delany's services
have consistently helped laid-offXYZ employees find jobs. Instead of attempting to convince
me that Walsh provided a disservice to XYZ 8 years ago, the author should provide better
evidence that Walsh's services would be inferior to Delany's in the foreseeable future.
Accordingly, to better assess the recommendation it would be helpful to compare the number
of staff members per office at the two firms, and the level of experience of those staff members.
It would also be useful to know what sorts of skills laid-off XYZ employees possess, and which
firm, Delany or Walsh, serves industries and areas with more openings for people with those
skills.























Argument 125
The following appeared as an editorial in the student newspaper of Groveton College.
"To combat the recently reported dramatic rise in cheating among college and university
students, these institutions should adopt honor codes similar to Groveton's, which calls for
students to agree not to cheat in their academic endeavors and to notify a faculty member if
they suspect that others have cheated. Groveton's honor code replaced an old-fashioned
system in which students were closely monitored by teachers and an average of thirty cases of
cheating per year were reported. The honor code has proven far more successful: in the first
year it was in place, students reported twenty-one cases of cheating; five years later, this
figure had dropped to fourteen. Moreover, in a recent survey conducted by the Groveton honor
council, a majority of students said that they would be less likely to cheat with an honor code in
place than without."
In this editorial the author concludes that colleges should adopt an honor code for detecting
academic cheating. To support this condusion the author points out that the first year after
switching from a monitoring system to an honor system the annual number of reported
cheating incidents at Groveton College decreased from 30 to 21, and that five years later the
number was only 14. The author also cites a survey in which most students indicated they
would be less likely to cheat under an honor system than if they are closely monitored. This
argument is unconvincing for several reasons.
First and foremost, the argument relies on the assumptions that Groveton students are just
as capable of detecting cheating as faculty monitors, and that these students are just as likely
to report cheating whenever they observe it. However, without evidence to substantiate these
assumptions one cannot reasonably conclude that the honor code has in fact resulted in a
decline in the incidence of cheating at Groveton. Besides, common sense tells me that these
assumptions are dubious at best; an impartial faculty observer is more likely to detect and
report cheating than a preoccupied student under peer pressure not to report cheating among
classmates.
The argument also assumes that during the five-year period all other conditions possibly
affecting the reported incidence of cheating at Groveton remained unchanged. Such
conditions include the number of Groveton students and the overall integrity of the student
body. After five years it is entirely possible that these conditions have changed, and that the
reported decrease in cheating is attributable to one or more such changes. Thus, without ruling
out such alternative explanations for the reported decrease, the author cannot convince me
that the honor code has in fact contributed to a decline in the incidence of cheating at
Groveton.
The author's recommendation that other colleges follow Groveton's example depends on
the additional assumption that Groveton is typical in ways relevant to the incidence of cheating.
However, this is not necessarily the case. For instance, perhaps Groveton students are more
or less likely to report cheating, or to cheat under an honor system, than typical college
students. Lacking evidence that Groveton students are typical in these respects, the argument
is indefensible.
Finally, the survey that the author cites might be unreliable in any of three respects. First, the
author fails to assure us that the survey's respondents are representative of all college
students. Second, the survey results depend on the honesty and integrity of the respondents.
Third, hypothetical predictions about one's future behavior are inherently less reliable than
reports of proven behavior. Lacking evidence that the survey is reliable, the author cannot
reasonably rely on the survey in recommending that other colleges adopt an honor code.
In conclusion, to persuade me that other colleges should adopt an honor code in order to
reduce cheating, the author must supply clear evidence that cheating at Groveton in fact
decreased after the honor code was instituted there, and that it is this code that was
responsible for the decrease. Finally, to better assess the usefulness of the survey I would
need specific information about the survey's sampling methodology.